Vol.:(0123456789) 1 3
Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering (2023) 30:3845–3865
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-023-09922-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends
and Perspectives
Dimitrios Angelis1
 · Filippos Sofos1  · Theodoros E. Karakasidis1
Received: 4 December 2022 / Accepted: 27 March 2023 / Published online: 19 April 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Symbolic regression (SR) is a machine learning-based regression method based on genetic programming principles that
integrates techniques and processes from heterogeneous scientific fields and is capable of providing analytical equations
purely from data. This remarkable characteristic diminishes the need to incorporate prior knowledge about the investigated
system. SR can spot profound and elucidate ambiguous relations that can be generalizable, applicable, explainable and span
over most scientific, technological, economical, and social principles. In this review, current state of the art is documented,
technical and physical characteristics of SR are presented, the available programming techniques are investigated, fields of
application are explored, and future perspectives are discussed.
1 Introduction
Data science has been the driving force for the dawn of the
fourth industrial revolution, bringing the big-data concept
in focus of most science and engineering applications. It
has been stated that the global datasphere will get as high
as 175 Zettabytes by the year 2025 while it was merely 33
Zettabytes in 2018 [1]. As a result, researchers from most
disciplines have been motivated on exploring ways to deploy
this vast amount of data. The main idea is the identification of patterns and/or hidden equations that govern these
datasets. Data mining, apart from the exploitation of wellestablished statistical and numerical methods, has also been
directed towards the extraction of mathematical expressions,
which can be utilized for the establishment of new and the
verification of existing physical laws. Therefore, the question that now arises is: Should we acknowledge the era we
experience as the era of big data, and if so, what is the effect
on science and technology?
Novel data-driven approaches are now exploited in materials science, among others, [2] (see Fig. 1) and have opened
the road to the introduction of Materials Informatics [3,
4] and relevant approaches whose primary concern is the
discovery of novel materials at reasonable computational
cost. Furthermore, in order to enhance this initiative, there
exist databases (e.g., Inorganic Crystal Structure Database
[5], Open Quantum Material Database [6], The Cambridge
Structural Database [7], AFLOWLIB [8]) to provide adequate support for scientists and engineers. However, materials science isn’t the only field that has benefited from the
advent of big data. The fourth paradigm of science, under
the framework of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to facilitate
the procedure [9], has substantially evolved in fields such
as bioinformatics, particle physics, space research, medical
imaging, construction applications, and more. To support
this observation, the universal recognition of big data and
data-driven methods is further becoming clear by the vast
increase of published articles on the topic [10].
Nevertheless, big data would be hard to handle without
the incorporation of AI, or, in other words, the assemblage
of methods and skills that allow humans and machines to
execute assignments that only intelligent entities can (e.g.,
perceive, reason, and act) [11]. Having been introduced
as a branch of computer science, AI is further comprised
of techniques with their own categories of algorithms (for
example, Machine Learning and Particle Swarm Optimization [12]), suggesting a statistical, predictive framework that
* Filippos Sofos
fsofos@uth.gr
Dimitrios Angelis
dimangelis@uth.gr
Theodoros E. Karakasidis
thkarak@uth.gr
1 Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory, Department
of Physics, University of Thessaly, Lamia 35100, Greece
3846 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
can be bound to a specific problem both in research and in
everyday life.
Machine Learning (ML) is an AI technique that has
acquired major interest for data analysis tasks, based on its
ability to learn from experience and, therefore, provides
accurate approximations and/or predictions on the underlying patterns [13]. Oftentimes, common statistical analysis
has been misidentified to ML, however, the former aims on
the accurate description of observations while the latter is
constructing algorithms whose focus lies on successful data
classification and approximations in order to predict the outcome [14]. ML is widely recognized as an effective tool for
research and applied purposes, in fields like additive manufacturing [15, 16, 17, 18], materials science [14, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29], autonomous driving [30, 31,
32], solar cells [33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39], chemistry [40,
41, 42], welding industry [43], solar radiation [44, 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51] and many more.
Notwithstanding the data-driven techniques evolution,
barriers have arisen when it comes to the interpretation of
the underlying physics, that has somehow to be extracted
from data patterns. A successful attempt to bind physical
laws to the solution of partial differential equations has
been made with the incorporation of Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) [52] and some of their new
implementations, such as PI-GP [53] and B-PINNs [54].
From another point of view, during the development of
a NN the output triggered by an input value is predetermined, and that means the mapping could be abstract [55].
Although this is a procedure that machines can deal with,
it might be extremely difficult for humans to make a sense
out of it [56], since this “black-box” model [57] does not
adhere to the principles of explainable and generalizable
AI. Several problems may also come up when these models are used in the field, for instance, when a manufacturer
of an autonomous car cannot apprehend the choice that the
car will do in infrequent critical situations (as in protecting
the driver or pedestrians in an imminent crash), concerns
might appear on the applicability of the algorithm [58].
The absence of a physical interpretation in data-driven
black-box models, has been the driving force for a change
of heart.
This review has been focused on presenting an MLbased method, Symbolic Regression (SR), which has been
developed on Evolutionary Computing principles. SR is
differentiated from a purely data-driven black-box model,
as it is equipped with the ability to generate symbolic
expressions (analytical equations) without considering
prior constraints and provides a physics-inspired overlook.
The ever growing adaptation of SR in various scientific
fields has been captured by the rapid growth of related
published papers in the last decade and more (see Fig. 2)
and it would be beneficial to dive deep into its remarkable
characteristics that have made it a new trend in physicsbased computations. In the sections that follow, there
will be a brief introduction on various ML types (Sect. 2)
adopted in science and engineering, a comprehensive
analysis of SR and the respective algorithms incorporated
(Sect. 3), mapping of scientific fields where SR has been
successfully employed and others that have shown a promising prospect (Sect. 4) and, finally, we sum up with a
Fig. 1  The four paradigms of
science: empirical, theoretical,
computational and data-driven
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3847
1 3
concluding discussion and present the future perspectives
of SR (Sect. 5).
2  Machine Learning
The present section is organized as follows. Firstly, categories and useful information about ML will be introduced.
Secondly, there will be a brief presentation of several ML
algorithms that researchers are most familiar with. Finally,
more complex approximations such as Deep Learning will
be discussed.
2.1  Machine Learning Categories
Machine Learning can be subdivided into three major categories, (i) Supervised Learning (SL), (ii) Unsupervised
Learning (UL) and (iii) Reinforcement Learning (RL) [59],
although the latter isn’t always recognized as a separate division. In SL, the training procedure involves data manipulation based on labeled input/output pairs, while the implied
algorithms seek for determining a hidden function able to
map input behavior to the desired output. On the other hand,
in UL, no labels are specified on the input data and the algorithmic procedures urge to reveal the implied data interconnections [60]. In RL, the model does not require input data
as it constructs its own by self-training and, furthermore, it
is self-challenged to achieve higher accuracy metrics [61].
A combination of SL and UL has also been proposed in
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) in which both labeled and
unlabeled data are utilized. SSL focuses on the identification
of how the learning procedure may be affected by a mixture
of labeled and unlabeled data and the construction of algorithms capable of exploiting this scheme [62].
A successful ML algorithm implementation is tightly
paired with the quality and quantity of available data. In
cases where data extracted from various databases and/or
literature sources poses no viable option, attention is drawn
into experimental or simulation output (e.g., Density-Functional Theory (DFT), Molecular Dynamics (MD), etc.) [23],
posing a four-way route to acquire data. Attention has to be
drawn also on data representation, as it may vary from discrete (e.g., texts) to continuous (e.g., vectors and tensors) or
weighted graphs [22]. Still, data availability is not enough;
it is imperative to follow a common format [63] and, most of
the times, a pre-processing step is required [23].
However, an inherent disadvantage of such approaches is
bound to the fact that ML methods are prone to overfitting.
Overfitting occurs when an algorithm is “finely” trained on
a specific dataset, which in turn results on high statistical
errors when applied to a different dataset. In such case, the
proposed algorithm becomes unsuitable for further use, or in
other words, ungeneralizable. To overcome this issue, various techniques have been proposed, such as hold-out, k-fold
cross-validation, and regularization [16].
2.2  Machine Learning Algorithms
There has been a wealth of ML algorithms being established
throughout the years, from simple linear models to laborious deep learning architectures. Some of the most widely
adopted are Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Support
Vector Machines (SVM) and Decision Trees (DT) based.
The idea behind ANN is that it reacts the same way as the
neural networks of human brain, with its abilities spanning
Fig. 2  Publications related to
symbolic regression from 2000
to 2021
3848 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
to applications such as classification, regression, learning
and generalization [64]. SVM models are utilized for classification, while its regression counterpart is the Support Vector Regression (SVR) model [28]. DT methods employ treeform graphs and have been utilized for classification tasks.
DTs are susceptible to complexity and overfitting issues, and
various alternatives have been constructed, such as Random
Forest (RF) and Gradient Boost (GB), by employing different trees in a forest or a serial weighted manner, respectively
[14]. There are many references in the literature for these
models, which are not going to be covered here (see, for
example, [65]).
Nevertheless, although implementations based on Shallow Learning algorithms, such as ANNs, SVMs, and DTs,
are quite effective in numerous fields (e.g., materials science), some issues may occur in demanding applications,
such as poor accuracy over DFT simulations [22]. This has
opened the discussion on establishing more robust methods,
such as Deep Learning (DL).
2.3  Deep Learning
While Shallow Learning methods may be effective and accurate on dealing with data over a small set of computational
nodes, DL is capable of exploiting big data by mapping it
to multiple layers in order to extract information and make
predictions [23], even on noisy data [66]. DL models embed
mathematical concepts (linear algebra, probability theory)
and programming techniques in hidden layers that span
over a number of thousands or more [12, 21], making them
perfectly fit in applications ranging from processing videos
and images [67, 68, 69, 70], speech recognition [71], and
bio-informatics [72], among others. Nevertheless, physical
interpretation of the outcome still lacks, and this would benefit their application in physical sciences, where interpretability has a central role. In such cases, it would be beneficial to adopt models that produce meaningful results (i.e.,
mathematical expressions), which could spot correlations
with existing empirical relations and propose an analytical
approach bound to physical laws.
3  Symbolic Regression
Symbolic Regression is a type of regression analysis in
which a mathematical function that describes a given dataset is derived. While conventional regression methods (e.g.,
linear, quadratic, etc.) have their independent variable(s) predetermined and try to adjust a number of numerical coefficients in order to achieve perfect fit, SR attempts to find the
parameters and equations simultaneously [55].
Derived from the superset of AI available methods,
SR is usually implemented by evolutionary algorithms.
At the same time, the most widely adopted concepts for
SR construction are adopted from Genetic Programming
(GP) [73]. In this section, the basic features of GP will
be presented, an analytical development of the basic SR
procedure is to be exemplified, several features that characterize SR superiority will be presented, while available
SR programming techniques will be evaluated.
3.1  Genetic Programming Fundamentals
Genetic Programming (GP) [74] is an Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) instance [75] which in turn is a subset of Evolutionary Computing (EC) [76] (see Fig. 3). Moreover, GP
provides the framework to express data behavior through
mathematical equations, by exploring the available mathematical space in an evolutionary process. It is a fact that
GP can find applicability in most regression-based science
and engineering problems. The procedure that GP follows,
includes the construction of different symbolic expressions, on which a comparison is made on its parts. The
expressions that do not comply with accuracy and complexity measures being set are discarded, while those that
appear as a potential solution to the problem are combined
and form an output expression able to produce the desired
outcome. The most common way to visualize a symbolic
expression is a tree-structure with nodes and branches.
Currently there are numerous programming options that
Fig. 3  From evolutionary computing to symbolic regression
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3849
1 3
can implement GP calculations, such as the Glyph package in Python [77] and GPTIPS toolbox in MatLab [78].
3.2  GP‑SR Procedure
The GP tree-structure scheme consists of primitive functions
and terminal nodes. While primitive functions could appear
in any possible form (e.g., +, −, ∗, ÷, log, etc.), terminal
nodes correspond to data inputs (e.g., X,Y) and numeric constants (e.g., 0.1) that may be needed to construct a symbolic
expression. The final combination gives the desired expression in the form of a rooted tree. For example, in Fig. 4a, a
tree-structure that corresponds to the symbolic expression
S1 is presented. The numbers that appear above each node
are irrelevant to the procedure and serve only as a reference
point. Nodes with number 1 and 2 are primitive functions
(e.g., ÷, −) while nodes 3,4,5 are filled with a numerical
constant (e.g., 0.1) and input variables (e.g., X, Y). Configurations of primitive functions and terminals are drawn
hierarchically in GP, while at the same time they serve as
“individuals” from a population that contains a plurality of
those.
The process taking place aims on finding the proper number of nodes/terminals that achieve the best fit over a given
dataset and correspond to a final equation. For that reason,
GP evolves by exploring every possible implementation
between the primitive functions and terminals. To gain
insight on the complexity implied, it should be noted that
the search takes place in an infinite space that includes all
available mathematical operators and numerical constants.
Therefore, to search for the optimal fit, comparison measures are required, and these are related to the nature of the
problem investigated. During an equation search, each possible implementation is rated by the number of data it can
effectively handle, and the one that seems more likely to
contribute on the final equation is evaluated on the error
it produces. A common error metric usually incorporated
in SR algorithms is the sum of the squares (SSE), derived
from the differences between the predicted outcome and the
tabulated output value [56], given by:
or due to the fact that the search occurs on various instances,
the error could be measured as an average (Mean Squared
Error (MSE)), with a mathematical formula of:
where, n is the total number of inspected situations, i corresponds to the individual situation, Ŷ is the predicted value
of the configuration and Y is the correct answer.
Starting from the top, from an infinite pool of choices,
GP creates the first population randomly, while the size of
the population is predetermined by the user. Each configuration inside the population could possibly contribute as a
poor fitness parameter, affecting the whole dataset. However, some configurations might appear more effective than
others. By continuously examining the effect of each one
of these implementations, the process discovers promising
candidates that produce small error, and employs them in
future implementations, while those with poor performance
are abandoned. Furthermore, the selection of those parts
(sub-configurations) are random (e.g., sub-configuration
2-3-4 from Fig. 4a), resulting that way on a generated symbolic expression that differs in terms of tree shape and depth
compared to the parental expression.
For instance, let there be another symbolic expression
S2 as shown in Fig. 4b. Additionally, let S2 be deemed efficient by the comparison on fitness and therefore sustain the
combination as described above. Finally, let the node with
number 2 from Fig. 4a (sub-configuration 2-3-4) and the
node with number 4 from Fig. 4b (sub-configuration 4-5)
be randomly selected for the combination. Then, the configurations in the symbolic expression S1 and S2 have their
sub-configurations exchanged. When the exchanging procedure is completed, two new configurations have emerged
SSE = (1) ∑n
i=1
(Yi − Ŷ
i
)
2 ,
MSE = (2)
1
n
∑n
i=1
(Yi − Ŷ
i
)
2 ,
Fig. 4  Symbolic expression examples
3850 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
by the parts of their parents, while the parental configurations are concurrently removed from the procedure. Thus,
new symbolic expressions are obtained, S3 and S4, which
are depicted in Fig. 4c and d respectively. Although their
shape has changed and contributed to the creation of new
expressions, the fact that their depth remained the same is
purely coincidental, as the investigation of possible configurations and combination of those, occurs on thousands of
expressions. It should also be noted that the exchange takes
place in parallel and by an iterative manner, random parts
of promising expressions are combined till the final goal of
obtaining a robust equation.
The evolutionary procedure proceeds step by step, as the
average error is decreased due to the removal of poor-performing expressions. Eventually, at a predetermined point,
the GP sequence finalizes, and the equation is exported.
Reasons for termination could be either the definition of a
maximum step on the algorithm (i.e., a limit set on the created populations by the user), a point where the statistical
error of an individual equals to zero (optimal equation) or
a point where the statistical error is lower than a given constant (e.g., 0.01). However, a mixture of those is preferred
to cover every aspect. Finally, it should be noted that it is
not mandatory for GP to produce one equation as it can be
defined to export a number of suggestions, usually with a
ranging complexity between equations. Here, it has to be
beard in mind that low complexity might indicate poor error
performance, while high complexity value could be prone to
overfitting (Pareto front) [56].
In other words, GP initiates the procedure by creating an
initial population filled by random symbolic expressions,
with dimensions that vary according to the user configuration. Random mutations take place to minimize the possibility of the algorithm being trapped in local minima [79]. A
way to visualize symbolic expressions is by a tree-structure
form that contains primitive functions and terminal constants. Additionally, by producing a great number of expressions, GP compares them on the basis of how thy fitting on
the given dataset. Candidate expressions that achieve small
error are selected for further investigation. It should be reminisced that the nature of the comparison varies according to
the problem’s domain, while in the present case, the SSE,
or the MSE are employed. Furthermore, GP surveys all possible sub-configurations and combines them in a way that
creates a combined superset, whereas the parental expressions are discarded, and the final equation(s) are exported. A
flowchart that employs GP evolution is illustrated in Fig. 5.
3.3  Programming Techniques
During the past decades, the extreme computational cost of
SR implementations has been the main reason that posed
barriers on its wide adaptation. Nowadays, as hardware has
evolved in fast parallel architectures, the road for new SR
approaches has opened, suggesting both efficiency and calculation speed.
At present, there are ample methods in the literature that
propose different SR implementations. To mention a few,
there exist models that employ a Monte Carlo tree search
(MCTS) algorithm [80], a matrix-based encoding process
[55], and advanced pre-processing schemes applied before
algorithmic training [81] or even before regression begins
Fig. 5  Genetic programming based symbolic regression flowchart
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3851
1 3
[82]. Others have generated algorithms such as nearest
neighbor indexing [83] or non-evolutionary techniques such
as the FFX algorithm [73]. The latter, although extremely
fast, produces non-interpretable equations [84]. In addition, there also exist Mixed-Integer Non-Linear Programming (MINLP) formulations [85, 86], models that identify
the SR problem as a linguistic [87], others that incorporate
probabilistic features such as probabilistic framework [88]
or probabilistic grammars [89], Bayesian approaches [90]
and more [91, 92].
The concept of increased accuracy is the focal point of GP
approaches as it constitutes a key element on the applicability of ML models [93]. There have been efforts on modifying
the basic GP-SR procedure [18, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98], while, on
the other hand, some argue that GP-based procedures lead to
abstract mathematical formulas that make no sense [83]. An
intriguing idea that is also supported is the restriction of the
search space into a set of symbols, by incorporating several
constraints into the algorithm (usually by accepting prior
knowledge about the system) [55, 58, 89, 99, 100]. Towards
this direction, one could enforce a certain pattern to the generated expressions, such as monotonicity or symmetry and,
as a result, increase the accuracy, reduce the computational
cost, while, in parallel, adhere to well-established physical
empirical or analytical expressions that already exist in the
literature and need modifications according to the problem
under investigation [101].
However, researchers should be aware of the limitations implied in such approaches. For instance, a non-GP
approach [84] which constraints the derived formula to a
set of mathematical symbols, has produced accurate predictions with low computational cost, but, on the downside,
the algorithm has shown limited applicability and adaptability, since it cannot employ more complex cases, where
periodicity [84] or exponentiality is needed. Hybrid methods have also been proposed, such as Deterministic/GP-SR
models [102], neural-guided/GP [103] and others [99, 104,
105, 106]. Moreover, Neural Network based architectures
have been employed [107, 108], while others have gone a
step further and merged NN-based models with several DL
features [109, 110].
Promising results have been obtained through methods
that incorporate Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN) [111].
Bayesian statistics [112] in contrast to conventional statistics
(also known as frequentist statistics) do not consider a fixed
parameter, but they rather identify it as a random variable
which can be described with a probability distribution. BNN
functions as a typical Neural Network with the exception
that the parameters are distributions, instead of a fixed value,
and the training occurs via Bayesian inference. This is an
important feature of BNN as it provides the ability to quantify uncertainties, meaning that the algorithm incorporates
confidence intervals instead of a single point. Moreover,
Bayesian inference considers every plausible scenario that
could happen, and it marginalizes the parameters over the
most possible outcome. For example, in image processing,
if an image appears distorted, frequentist statistical inference
has no power to rationalize and make a valid sense out of it
as it has no available space to work. It is what it is. On the
other hand, Bayesian inference, model the problem by navigating through probabilities. Thus, it overcomes the issue
generated by the distorted (noisy) image [112].
At present, there are various programming techniques
to implement SR under GP principles, either heuristic or
Table 1  List of various SR approaches
a
First launched
Short description Year References
Shape-constrained 2022 [100]
PS-Tree (GP modification) 2022 [97]
DoME (deterministic) 2022 [84]
Bayesian 2022 [90]
Tensorial sparse 2022 [92]
Mixed-integer non-linear programming 2022 [86]
Probabilistic framework 2022 [88]
Functional-Hybrid model 2022 [104]
TaylorGP (GP modification) 2022 [96]
GSR (matrix based encoding scheme) 2022 [55]
Symbolic Physics Learner (MCTS) 2021 [80]
Physically constrained 2021 [99]
GP-GOMEA (GP modification) 2021 [116]
Temporal regression 2021 [91]
SymbolicGPT (probabilistic language) 2021 [87]
Large scale pre-training 2021 [81]
Pre-regression 2021 [82]
Hybrid Neural-Guided/GP 2021 [103]
Probabilistic grammars 2021 [89]
Neural Network based 2021 [109]
GP modification 2021 [94]
Bayesian Neural Network 2021 [111]
AI Feynman 2.0 (graph modularity) 2020 [108]
GP modification 2020 [18]
Multi-task SISSO 2019 [117]
AI Feynman (Neural Network) 2019 [107]
DSR (Deep Learning) 2019 [110]
Positional CGP (GP modification) 2018 [95]
IT (search space constrain) 2018 [58]
SISSO 2018 [118]
Mixed-integer non-linear programming 2017 [85]
Hybrid 2013 [102]
FFX (fast & deterministic) 2011 [73]
Nearest Neighbor Indexing 2010 [83]
Eureqa (software) 2009a [113]
HeuristicLab (software) 2002a [114]
3852 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
effective only in the implied data region, being presented
either as stand-alone codes or in user-friendly platforms
(e.g., Eureqa [113], HeuristicLab [114]), free or commercial. A relevant list is presented in Table 1. Finally, future
studies on SR can exploit the open-source characteristics of
SRBench [115] initiative, which is a promising benchmark
that can provide access in different datasets, perform algorithmic comparisons and result analysis, among others.
3.4  Pros and Cons
In contrast to other non-linear regression methods, SR does
not require a priori knowledge of the studied system, as it
is completely data-driven [119]. Of outmost importance is
the fact that SR can identify ambiguous relations in datasets
and therefore provide a more profound solution [80]. There
may be cases that governing equations that describe a system are partially known [120], and this is also a field where
SR can apply, providing a deeper understanding. Towards
generalizable AI, it provides a closed-form mathematical
expression easier to incorporate at models similar to the one
under investigation (e.g., finite element solver) [119].
Equally important is the ability of SR to be bound on
and validate physical laws [121]. For instance, Newton’s
law of gravitation was somehow rediscovered [122], while
another study has focused on rediscovering conservation
laws [123], validated by a data-driven approach and given
by a symbolic formula. However, care has to be taken when
aiming on potential scientific discoveries, as oversimplified
datasets and lack of evaluation metrics may lead to false
results [124].
The investigation of complex and nonlinear dynamic systems demands deep understanding of the physical behavior
in order to provide a reliable model [125]. Identifying differential equations via data-driven models, is a way to provide
governing equations directly from data instead of physical
laws, as equations in complex physical systems are scarce
[126]. Nevertheless, issues may arise due to data scarcity or
low fidelity, as oftentimes noise is present [80]. Noise can
be, though, anticipated with Bayesian approaches. SR has
also proven to be more effective than several ML models in
small datasets [127] and by generating simple and physicsbased relations, has an impact in its employability.
In contrast, the main drawback of SR is by no doubt the
computational time needed for evaluating thousands or more
equations [128]. This is one of the reasons that SR is better
suited in applications where the number of input parameters
is as small as possible [129]. To confront this barrier, a common strategy is to first identify the most important factors
in the dataset (this can be done by other ML models, such
as RF [101]) and then apply SR. However, this technique
may affect the obtained results when accuracy is the main
question.
From another point of view, as interpretability derives
from the need to understand and trust an ML model, verify
or manipulate it [130], and SR claims to be interpretable, at
least compared to other black-box approaches, the degree of
straightforwardness usually accounts for the size of generated expressions. Bloat is a common side effect that arises
by GP, in which the results tend to suffer from a burst of
complexity, while improvements on achieved fitting remain
slight [131], though promising [131].
4  Application in Science and Technology
Current computational techniques in most fields of science
and engineering have been able to find a balance between
computational efficiency and cost, as the rise of data-driven
models, along with the introduction of parallel hardware
architectures, constitute a novel framework that can be
exploited to obtain accurate results faster. Taking further
into account the inherent interpretability of SR models, the
perspective of obtaining meaningful equations is welcomed
by numerous fields in theoretical and applied science. An
extended review on materials science applications will be
made first, as it is an interdisciplinary field that enters most
science and engineering fields, through material properties
prediction and novel materials discovery, such as electrical
and mechanical engineering, construction applications, biophysics and energy applications, to mention a few.
4.1  Materials Science
Material science, from the sub-atomic to the macroscopic
level, is currently undergoing a major shift towards full
digitalization and automation and has opened new perspectives for innovation. Incorporation of databases, multi-scale
computations, and experiments are integrated with the aim
of reducing the time and cost of design and manufacturing
of materials. AI techniques are now focused on finding new
and/or predicting the properties of existing materials [25],
which will make possible the discovery of novel, tailor-made
materials. As materials investigation has been mainly conducted with expensive and complex experimental methods,
under the particular researcher’s intuition [132], and theoretical analysis is widely based on empirical relations, by
leveraging big data and AI methods, a new computational
paradigm emerges, to pose as a catalyst for materials development, along with exploiting available simulation techniques. To this end, data from multiple-scales of microstructures can be embedded with physics-based descriptions, to
reveal physical concepts such as thermodynamics, kinetics,
functional and mechanical properties.
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3853
1 3
4.1.1  Multiscale Modelling
Research on materials (solids or fluids) takes place at different scales of length and time, with each scale incorporating
features from the former (see Fig 6).
Starting from the atomic scale, ab-initio methods (first
principles) are performed by quantum mechanics (QM) calculations in order to obtain a form that describes the energy
of a system, the potential energy surface (PES). Calculations
are derived directly from physical laws and do not require
the incorporation of any experimental data or assumptions. However, these are based on finding solutions to the
Schrödinger’s equation, which may not be practical for most
real-world systems. This can be partly anticipated by the
incorporation of the density functional theory (DFT) [133].
Albeit capable of achieving quantum-accuracy, the usage
of atomistic methods is limited in terms of the accessible
computational time and simulation size. To overcome these
barriers, a number of particle methods have arisen.
Particle methods include, among others, the methods of
Molecular Dynamics (MD), Dissipative Particle Dynamics (DPD) and Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH).
These methods are appropriate for different size and time
scales and share the same features with purely meshfree and
Lagrangian nature. A particle in MD, DPD, and SPH acts as
both a material point and as an approximation point, that is,
the particle is regarded as a single atom or molecule in MD
in atomistic scales, a small cluster of atoms or molecules
in DPD in meso-scales, and a very small region in SPH in
macro-scales [134].
By joining multiple techniques and methods, multiscale
modeling has been developed and, during the past few years,
it succeeded to integrate ML with simulations to create
surrogate models [135, 136]. Research has shown that the
construction of ML interatomic potentials (MLIPs) trained
over ab-initio MD (AIMD) simulation results, could extend
the possibilities of materials research by bridging DFT with
MD and finite element (FE) simulations [137]. Furthermore,
SR approaches thrive on interatomic potential by providing simple solutions that significantly decrease the risk of
overfitting. Specifically, a SR model [138] generates fast and
accurate many-body interatomic potentials formed by fundamental physical principles, which in turn are flexible enough
to perform in multi-scale.
For example, a novel technique for bridging between
micro- and macro-scale, Ref. [139], where a combination
of computer simulations and ML models is suggested. Specifically, FE simulations were conducted for the generation
of input data to enter the ML models, and, subsequently, ML
algorithms develop a macroscopic model trained by a microscopic. The fact that traditional methods work in conjunction
with ML models, provides the ability to bridge across scales
and therefore provide more accurate predictions. However, it
is also stated that analytical functions are appealing for the
investigation of properties in micro- as well as in macroscale [139]. Thus, SR appears as a prominent tool for multi
scale investigation.
4.1.2  Properties Prediction
The development of material properties databases in a systematic way has altered materials research, as researchers
opt for ML models to extract information out of them [26].
Both material properties and their relation to processing conditions, are translated to form new computational models
[140]. There are cases where constitutive models express
how a material responds in different conditions, which in
Fig. 6  Multiscale modelling
3854 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
turn produces a stress–strain relation to generate the governing laws [141]. For instance, data-driven plasticity formulas were generated in studies [142, 143], while in another
approach [144], elastic solid models were constructed in
similar fashion.
Moreover, several applications focus on equation
generation from scratch towards the prediction of Lennard–Jones fluid diffusion [56, 145, 146] or the electrical conductivity of ionic liquids [101]. While others, have
equipped SR to investigate lattice thermal conductivity
[147], the critical temperature in superconductors [148] or
the yield strength of polycrystalline metals by key physical
quantities [149].
4.1.3  Discovery and Design
A concept familiar with material discovery, is material stability. There exist abundant element combinations one could
perform towards information from the periodic table and
produce a material, at least theoretically, since the additional
criterion of stability, i.e., a measure to estimate if the hypothetical material is feasible, has to be taken into account. The
role of SR in materials discovery and design has been evaluated [150] and it has been proven to be a suitable tool for
the identification of compound representations (also known
as descriptors [151]) and the creation of new that correlate
with materials stability [152].
On the other hand, materials discovery and design, aim
to fully exploit property prediction and produce materials
with target behavior. Nevertheles, this might be a challenging task, as the targeted property could appear only in unique
structures and, in addition, some properties ought to have a
perfect alignment in order to achieve a high performance
[153]. Therefore, it is vital to identify the parameters that
govern the functionality and their dependencies, in order to
optimize them [154].
A successful example of incorporating SR in such cases
has been presented ref [152]. Without any prior knowledge
on the problem’s domain, SR has generated accurate descriptors that define MXene stability. Furthermore, another study
[155] has implemented SR and generated simple and meaningful descriptors that has ultimately contributed on the
discovery of new catalysts. These applications illustrate the
fact that SR can produce accurate descriptors without any
chemical or other knowledge on the system and eventually
accelerate the discovery of novel materials.
4.2  Engineering Principles
In this section, various engineering sub-principles are to be
evaluated on the applicability of SR-related methods, such as
civil and construction, chemical, petroleum and natural gas
engineering, mechanical and computer engineering. Main
focus is the applicability of AI methods, and SR is capable
to provide symbolic expressions to be used at hand and pose
as a fast solution to real-life problems.
4.2.1  Construction and Building Materials
Starting from a subset of civil engineering, in hydraulics
(liquid flows through pipes), the Colebrook equation for
flow friction is a familiar model among engineers that is
also being adopted by adjacent engineering disciplines
[156]. Several models of the Colebrook equation via SR
were generated in study [156], where the obtained results
presented to be accurate enough. As the authors state, their
approaches are only valid for a turbulent regime due to the
fact that a transition from a laminar to a turbulent regime is
not efficiently described by the Colebrook equation. They
supplement, in their previous works, approaches were made
by genetic algorithms and neural networks to model this
transition unefficiently. In a subsequent study [157], simpler
equations were discovered that unify laminar and turbulent
hydraulic regimes and therefore diminishing the need to
account for changes in flow patterns at separate laminar or
turbulent flow models [157]. However, their dataset were
generated by sampling through already established equations
and not experimental data and therefore their application is
hindered [157].
From another point of view, concrete, the main construction material for most higher-scale applications, has been
also a popular subject of AI research. A number of published
papers has been focused on the construction of models to
estimate the seismic peak drift ratio [158, 159], the penetration depth into concrete blocks [160], the shear capacity of
steel fiber-reinforced concrete beams, tracing fire response
of concrete structures [161] or the seismic response through
a fragility analysis [162], while others aim on the accurate
description of remaining fatigue life [163, 164] or bearingtype bolted connections’ shear resistance. One should note
that, while the investigation of previously noted instances
were conducted by modelling measurements, in several
occasions [160, 163, 165] the generated equations outperformed conventional employed formulas.
4.2.2  Chemical Engineering
Drag coefficient has a crucial role in gas-solid flows, as it
provides an analytical view of the hydrodynamics therein
[166]. At the industrial scale, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations are being employed towards this
investigation [167]. Moreover, CFD simulations depend
on the Euler–Euler or Euler–Lagrange models [167],
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3855
1 3
which both of them need to possess efficient drag correlation models in order to take into consideration gas-particle
interactions [168]. Current employment of SR techniques,
are found in studies about the investigation of fundamental principles in the drag coefficient [169], construction of
brand new drag correlations which can be used as input to
CFD models [167] or a simple drag model [166] which have
proven to outperform standard formulations.
Further notations highlight the prospect of SR employment to the catalysis field in order to obtain physic-based
models [79], or its incorporation into a method to obtain
a whey protein fouling prediction model in plate heat
exchanger, by formulating a parameter that needs to be readjusted when a slight change on the solution of whey protein or process conditions take place [170]. Others, have
successfully identified physical relations of fluids and kinetic
laws of chemical reactions [171] or generated expression in
order to predict the particle size distribution during fluidization [172].
4.2.3  Petroleum and Natural Gas Engineering
In petroleum engineering, oil viscosity is of significant
value, with its calculation being conducted by experimental
measurements or empirical formulas at different pressure
regions [173]. However, the former occasionally suffer from
inadequate measurement supply while the latter generates
insufficiently outcomes [173]. To overwhelm this situation,
in study [173], there is presented a SR approach in which
correlation models were constructed across every pressure
region directly from data points, which in turn managed to
outperform current models. On the other hand, a SR application about predicting the rate of penetration in drilling of
hydrocarbon reservoirs [174], resulted on an expression to
be overpowered by RF and ANN estimations [174].
Moreover, foam induced by a surfactant solution and
nitrogen, finds room of application in tasks such as oil recovery, acid diversion and aquifer remediation, with its mobility being generally characterized in terms of pressure drop
[175]. Capturing the physical behavior of the system and
classifying relative variables according to their significance
to steady state pressure drop, was accomplished by generating analytical expressions in study [175], by accepting no
prior knowledge regarding the underlying physical behavior.
Others, have focused on modelling oil production [176] or
estimating the multiple fractured horizontal wells flow performance [177].
In contrast to other hydrocarbon-based materials (e.g.,
oil, coal), natural gas constitutes a cheaper and cleaner
option [178] to meet our energy demands. Similar to petroleum engineering, estimating the viscosity is one of the
top priorities in natural gas studies, as it can be utilized to
efficiently synthesize models about production, transportation or gas storage systems [179]. To this end, SR studies regarding the prediction of dynamic viscosity [180] or
pure and impure viscosity [179] appear most appealing.
Supplementary applications, deal with models construction towards hydrate formation temperature estimation
[181], estimation of equilibrium water dewpoint temperature [182] and the prediction of the gas compressibility
factor [178].
4.2.4  Mechanical Engineering
Objectives of control systems could be summarized into
maintaining a process, which could be affected by external
parameters, and a transition from one process to another
[183]. In order to do so, the control system often manages
other parameters (e.g., pressure, temperature, etc.) to reach
or preserve a certain status [183]. In this regard, several
studies have equipped SR to generate analytic functions
towards a control system design [128, 184].
Moreover, SR has been utilized to derive models capable of describing the underlying connection between alloy
composition, cooling time and hardness, in welding heataffected zone of low alloy steel [185]. Additionally, SR has
been employed to estimate constitutive model parameters
in an alloy research [186], or even facilitated to create
expressions to search for the optimized components during
machine tool design by finding the modal mass distribution matrix, which is usually hard to obtain [187].
Furthermore, SR has provided constitutive formulas of
material behavior in aluminum alloys [119] or been incorporated into a mergent of techniques where SR estimated
the calibration parameters of a physics-based model [188].
Calibration of model parameters that depend on processing
conditions may pose a major obstacle [140]. These parameters are occasionally fitted, in order to reach an agreement with measurements; for that reason, the degree of
importance of other parameters on the calibration parameters is not completely established [188]. To overcome this
issue, two techniques have been proposed, the explicit and
implicit [140].
In the explicit method, the calibration parameters are
primarily optimized, while a formula for the prediction of
the optimized values using SR, is generated next. Then,
a combination of the generated expressions on calibration parameters and a physics-based constitutive model
takes place, in order to create a hybrid approach. In the
implicit method, no optimization of calibration parameters
occurs as they undergo a tree-based GP procedure on the
first steps. In addition, no extra combination of expressions similar to the explicit method are performed, as
they are already combined in a multi-tree GP, where each
3856 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
individual has a number of trees that correspond to the
number of calibration parameters. Note, that the authors
recommend the implicit method for further use, while they
also note that although the implicit method may be more
computationally expensive, the remarkably higher accuracy cannot be ignored.
4.2.5  Computer Engineering
Computer and Information science has much to offer to SR
programming, from the view of constructing and suggesting
new techniques to improve the applicability of the genetic
algorithms on existing physical and industrial problems. For
example, a novel fault detection mechanism has been constructed with SR symbolic techniques and found to achieve
better results than traditional methods, such as the support
vector machine and pattern recognition neural network algorithms [189]. Moreover, another industrial application refers
to enhancing models of learning behavior that present, better learning response than manual and experienced learners [190]. Techniques such as the narrowing of the search
space through a semantic cluster library have given promising results [191], while a statistical-based SR algorithm has
been proposed that uses statistical information to improve
its performance [192].
On the other hand, SR improvement may be also achieved
by decomposing the problem under investigation into several
subproblems [193]. There are also cases where SR has been
bound to reinforcement learning, and has been able to deal
with dynamic tasks, with back-propagation capability [194]
or even a dynamic process formulation [195]. Finally, since
GP problems oftentimes require tons of computational time
to complete, the evaluation time has been used as an estimate of model complexity and a new method is proposed to
control it [196].
4.3  Other Fields
4.3.1  Physics and Astronomy
Data from astronomical observations is undoubtedly rich
and AI methods are well-posed to its exploitation. For example, galaxy clusters turn out to be the most immense structures in the universe [197], as they contain several galaxies,
that further include dark matter, black holes and more [198].
Moreover, they operate by mechanisms regarding the evolution and formation of those, whose details are not yet fully
understood [198]. Thus, various approaches have emerged
for their investigation, such as searching of expressions capable to unify properties of galaxy clusters to their masses
[197], studying the galaxy-halo connection [199], modelling
the assembly bias [129] and estimating the total mass of a
subhalo [198].
In addition, SR has been applied in exoplanet transit
spectroscopy modelling [200], as observations of planetary
transits at different wavelengths are often investigated as a
method to gain knowledge of the structure and composition of an exoplanet’s atmosphere [200]. Further applications worth noting, include rediscovering orbital anomalies
from observations of position and velocity by generating a
model of dynamics [201], predicting gravitational waveform
surrogates [202], reconstructing the duality parameter in an
approach to predict the cosmic distance duality relation with
strongly lensed gravitational wave events [203], analyzing
solar activity in a solar cycle and successfully revealing
underlying governing laws regarding magnetic wave generation [204].
4.3.2  Energy and the Environment
Green growth is the way towards a sustainable future.
Although SR cannot be considered as the basic means of
directing the world towards green transition, it can be easily
implemented to contribute to a greener environment. For
example, an SR-based study supports that green transition is
highly likely to be embraced by developed countries, while
underdeveloped or still developing countries follow a model
where they choose economic growth over green [205]. The
current work avoids classification of countries in developed
or underdeveloped and focuses on ways to enhance the green
environment’s harnessing systems and fundamental components that it is accounted for.
Energy from the sun is currently covering a substantial
amount of global energy demands. From a ML point of view,
applications such as solar radiation prediction [206, 207] and
photovoltaic power prediction [208] can open the pathway
towards better energy management. Apart from renewable
applications that incorporate solar radiation, wind energy
is also harnessed to produce a significant amount of energy
resources. Wind speed analysis [209, 210] and wind power
generation efficiency [211] studies, could eventually produce
an improved version of wind turbines, by exploiting novel
computational ML models.
However, from an environmentalist point of view, an
energy surplus should not lead on an excessive use of available energy, by continuously increasing the income of generated power to adhere to our costly way of life; damage
should be also minimized. Damage minimization can occur
via energy consumption modelling [90, 212, 213], energy
management [214], carbon emission studies [215, 216],
exhaust emission [217] and modelling of air quality [91].
All these applications can contribute towards a green energy
transition and securing a healthier planet.
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3857
1 3
4.3.3  Medical Sciences
The majority of SR applications in medical science, follow
a similar pattern, starting from the identification of important features between a dataset (usually measurements or
patients’ medical history) and followed by the establishment
of suitable models towards forecasting, prognostication or
successful diagnosis.
For example, in a study about Parkinson disease [218],
SR was able to find important features that relate to gait
changes. Similarly, in study [219], a comprehensible risk
model was generated to predict survival rate of breast cancer
patients. Further applications are found in analyzing measurements towards hepatocellular carcinoma diagnosis (liver
cancer) [220], estimating hemoglobin and glucose levels in
blood by modelling key features from fingertip videos [221],
pairing patients that show similar characteristics on the way
to radiotherapy dose reconstruction and therefore improve
the design of radiation treatments [222] or analyzing measurements of different body areas towards human walking
modelling [223].
Additionally, SR incorporation has led to the enhancement of previous estimator models, adding mathematical
interpretability to previously adopted “black-box” ML models [224]. More specifically, SR has been exploited to create
mathematical formulas about transformations of covariates
from patients’ medical records and then those formulas
were used in the Cox model [225], resulting in even higher
prediction accuracy compared to solely applying the Cox
model. In another study about pregnancies which develop
pre-eclampsia, SR has outperformed models based on logistic regression by identifying relations between important
features [226].
4.3.4  Financial
The Covid-19 pandemic wreaked havoc to previous macroeconomic models, and thereupon the need to establish accurate estimates is now, more than ever, evident [227]. Macroeconomic models are often utilized as a means to guide
political and financial decisions [228] and by integrating
SR into those approaches, possible relations between variables might come up to light. Early studies have focused on
the recognition of those interactions in large datasets that
contain different observations of several economic quantities [228], while succeeding models are centered in the
prediction of crude oil price [229] and economic growth
forecasting by investigating expectations of agents. Agents’
expectations regarding the economy’s condition are highvalued for economic modelling due to the fact that they contain explicit, multi-variate information about market [230]
and usually obtained via tendency surveys (business and
consumer surveys) [231]. As a result, approaches are made
via SR to form a link between survey data and a successful
economic growth model [227, 232].
Another application of SR via GP has been in econometric modelling [233] where the conventional ”exchange
equation” was reinvented. However, GP has not revealed its
full prospective in the field, as being underused in macroeconomic modelling [227]. Researchers think that the polymeric
generated expressions, who differ by those European Commission presents [232], will eventually escalate the situation by proving their superiority and update the currently
equipped models.
5  Conclusion and Future Perspectives
Symbolic Regression has emerged as a method that bridges
the gap between data, ML models and scientific theories,
providing analytical equations at hand, and this can be
specifically applicable in cases where only empirical and
numerical approaches have been established. Barriers that
may appear lie in the increased computational cost, equation
complexity, and efficient programming approaches.
It is imperative that new computational tools be exploited
in the future in order to reduce the computational cost of SR.
As advanced NN architectures and functions are constantly
being proposed for complex DL tasks, they should also be
embedded in an SR framework. For example, the incorporation of Generative Adversarial Networks along with the SR
algorithm, would facilitate the discovery of hidden physics
in small datasets. Data pre-processing is also an open issue,
since there is no standard procedure to deal with raw data,
as is the case with common ML tasks. Moreover, parallel,
GPU-based implementations would accelerate the SR process, reducing computational time, which, in cases of manyinput datasets, is prohibitive.
The transformational impact of SR on science and technology can be very high. Notwithstanding the fact that
results coming from SR investigation in various fields, both
in research and applied sciences, are still preliminary, the
method has shown great potential, extracting models with
performance comparable to state-of-the-art empirical relations widely used in the literature.
Novel algorithms, efficient data preprocessing methods,
data mining, and new function prediction, bound to physical
laws and as simple as possible, should be further prospected
to guide future scientific research. Following disciplines that
adhere to generalizability, interpretability, and applicability, SR is the AI branch that will be on the focus of primary research in the years to come and its evolution will be
towards meeting the requirements of practical applications.
We should keep in mind, however, that SR is not
directed to replace well-established theoretical research and
3858 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
mathematical approaches. It is more likely to be bound on
data science techniques and suggest an alternative method
of explaining and discovering hidden patterns and behaviors
in data coming from various sources. The concept of obtaining an analytical expression to describe physical phenomena
and processes only by diving into a dataset is practical and
can be intriguing, but, on the other hand, we believe that
many things are yet to be done on the direction of ensuring
that this expression is physically explainable and lie on firm
basis.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-023-09922-z.
Funding Open access funding provided by HEAL-Link Greece. F.S.
has received research support in the context of a grant received by the
Center of Research Innovation and Excellence of U.Th., funded by the
Special Account for Research Grants of U.Th.
Declarations
Conflict of interest D.A. and T.E.K have no financial interests to declare. On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that
there is no conflict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Rydning DR-JG-J, Reinsel J, Gantz J (2018) The digitization of
the world from edge to core. Framingham: International Data
Corporation 16
2. Agrawal A, Choudhary A (2016) Perspective: materials informatics and big data: realization of the “fourth paradigm’’ of science
in materials science. APL Mater 4(5):053208. https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.4946894
3. Frydrych K, Karimi K, Pecelerowicz M, Alvarez R, DominguezGutiérrez FJ, Rovaris F, Papanikolaou S (2021) Materials informatics for mechanical deformation: a review of applications and
challenges. Materials. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14195764
4. Lopez-Bezanilla A, Littlewood PB (2020) Growing field of
materials informatics: databases and artificial intelligence. MRS
Communications 10(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.1557/mrc.2020.2
5. Belsky A, Hellenbrandt M, Karen VL, Luksch P (2002) New
developments in the inorganic crystal structure database (ICSD):
accessibility in support of materials research and design. Acta
Crystallogr Sect B 58(3 Part 1):364–369. https://doi.org/10.1107/
S0108768102006948
6. Kirklin S, Saal JE, Meredig B, Thompson A, Doak JW, Aykol
M, Rühl S, Wolverton C (2015) The open quantum materials
database (oqmd): assessing the accuracy of dft formation energies. Npj Comput Mater 1(1):1–15. https://doi.org/10.1038/npjco
mpumats.2015.10
7. Allen FH (2002) The Cambridge structural database: a quarter
of a million crystal structures and rising. Acta Crystallogr Sect B
58(3 Part 1):380–388. https://doi.org/10.1107/S01087681020038
90
8. Curtarolo S, Setyawan W, Wang S, Xue J, Yang K, Taylor RH,
Nelson LJ, Hart GLW, Sanvito S, Buongiorno-Nardelli M, Mingo
N, Levy O (2012) Aflowlib.org: a distributed materials properties
repository from high-throughput ab initio calculations. Comput
Mater Sci 58:227–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.
2012.02.002
9. Li S, Liu Y, Chen D, Jiang Y, Nie Z, Pan F (2022) Encoding the
atomic structure for machine learning in materials science. Wiley
Interdiscip Rev: Comput Mol Sci 12(1):1558. https://doi.org/10.
1002/wcms.1558
10. Zhou T, Song Z, Sundmacher K (2019) Big data creates new
opportunities for materials research: a review on methods and
applications of machine learning for materials design. Engineering 5(6):1017–1026. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2019.02.011
11. Patrick H (1992) Winston. Artificial Intelligence. Addison-Wesley (now 3rd Edition)
12. Xu X, Aggarwal D, Shankar K (2022) Instantaneous property
prediction and inverse design of plasmonic nanostructures using
machine learning: current applications and future directions.
Nanomaterials. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano12040633
13. Frank M, Drikakis D, Charissis V (2020) Machine-learning
methods for computational science and engineering. Computation. https://doi.org/10.3390/computation8010015
14. Chowdhury MA, Hossain N, Ahmed Shuvho MB, Fotouhi M,
Islam MS, Ali MR, Kashem MA (2021) Recent machine learning
guided material research—a review. Comput Condens Matter
29:00597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cocom.2021.e00597
15. Guo S, Agarwal M, Cooper C, Tian Q, Gao RX, Guo W, Guo
YB (2022) Machine learning for metal additive manufacturing:
towards a physics-informed data-driven paradigm. J Manufact
Syst 62:145–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.11.003
16. Meng L, McWilliams B, Jarosinski W, Park H-Y, Jung Y-G,
Lee J, Zhang J (2020) Machine learning in additive manufacturing: a review. Jom 72(6):2363–2377. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11837-020-04155-y
17. Qi X, Chen G, Li Y, Cheng X, Li C (2019) Applying neural-network-based machine learning to additive manufacturing: Current
applications, challenges, and future perspectives. Engineering
5(4):721–729. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2019.04.012
18. Wang C, Tan XP, Tor SB, Lim CS (2020) Machine learning in
additive manufacturing: state-of-the-art and perspectives. Addit
Manuf 36–101538. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2020.101538
19. Liu Y, Zhao T, Ju W, Shi S (2017) Materials discovery and design
using machine learning. J Materiomics 3(3):159–177. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmat.2017.08.002
20. Pilania G (2021) Machine learning in materials science: from
explainable predictions to autonomous design. Comput Mater Sci
193:110360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2021.110360
21. Dimiduk DM, Holm EA, Niezgoda SR (2018) Perspectives on
the impact of machine learning, deep learning, and artificial
intelligence on materials, processes, and structures engineering.
Integr Mater Manuf Innov 7(3):157–172. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40192-018-0117-8
22. Wei J, Chu X, Sun X-Y, Xu K, Deng H-X, Chen J, Wei Z, Lei M
(2019) Machine learning in materials science. InfoMat 1(3):338–
358. https://doi.org/10.1002/inf2.12028
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3859
1 3
23. Guo K, Yang Z, Yu C-H, Buehler MJ (2021) Artificial intelligence and machine learning in design of mechanical materials.
Mater. Horiz. 8:1153–1172. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0MH0
1451F
24. Sajid S, Haleem A, Bahl S, Javaid M, Goyal T, Mittal M (2021)
Data science applications for predictive maintenance and
materials science in context to industry 4.0. Mater Today 45,
4898–4905. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.01.357. Second
International Conference on Aspects of Materials Science and
Engineering (ICAMSE 2021)
25. Morgan D, Jacobs R (2020) Opportunities and challenges for machine learning in materials science. Annu Rev
Mater Res 50(1):71–103. https://doi.org/10.1146/annur
ev-matsci-070218-010015
26. Hart GL, Mueller T, Toher C, Curtarolo S (2021) Machine learning for alloys. Nat Rev Mater 6(8):730–755. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41578-021-00340-w
27. DeRousseau MA, Laftchiev E, Kasprzyk JR, Rajagopalan B,
Srubar WV (2019) A comparison of machine learning methods
for predicting the compressive strength of field-placed concrete.
Constr Build Mater 228:116661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbu
ildmat.2019.08.042
28. Nguyen H, Vu T, Vo TP, Thai H-T (2021) Efficient machine
learning models for prediction of concrete strengths. Constr
Build Mater 266:120950. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.
2020.120950
29. Kang Y, Li L, Li B (2021) Recent progress on discovery and
properties prediction of energy materials: simple machine learning meets complex quantum chemistry. J Energy Chem 54:72–
88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2020.05.044
30. Shalev-Shwartz S, Shammah S, Shashua A (2016) Safe, multiagent. reinforcement learning for autonomous driving arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1610.03295
31. Bolte J-A, Bar A, Lipinski D, Fingscheidt T (2019) Towards
corner case detection for autonomous driving. In: 2019 IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 438–445. https://doi.
org/10.1109/IVS.2019.8813817
32. Okuyama T, Gonsalves T, Upadhay J (2018) Autonomous driving
system based on deep q learnig. In: 2018 International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Systems (ICoIAS), pp. 201–205.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICoIAS.2018.8494053
33. Zhong S, Yap BK, Zhong Z, Ying L (2022) Review on y6-based
semiconductor materials and their future development via
machine learning. Crystals. https://doi.org/10.3390/cryst12020
168
34. Zhang L, He M, Shao S (2020) Machine learning for halide perovskite materials. Nano Energy 78:10538. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.nanoen.2020.105380
35. Li F, Peng X, Wang Z, Zhou Y, Wu Y, Jiang M, Xu M (2019)
Machine learning (ml)-assisted design and fabrication for solar
cells. Energy Environ Mater 2(4):280–291. https://doi.org/10.
1002/eem2.12049
36. Mahmood A, Wang J-L (2021) Machine learning for high performance organic solar cells: current scenario and future prospects. Energy Environ Sci 14(1):90–105. https://doi.org/10.1039/
D0EE02838J
37. Li J, Pradhan B, Gaur S, Thomas J (2019) Predictions and strategies learned from machine learning to develop high-performing
perovskite solar cells. Adv Energy Mater 9(46):1901891. https://
doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201901891
38. Padula D, Simpson JD, Troisi A (2019) Combining electronic
and structural features in machine learning models to predict
organic solar cells properties. Mater Horiz 6(2):343–349. https://
doi.org/10.1039/C8MH01135D
39. Sahu H, Ma H (2019) Unraveling correlations between molecular properties and device parameters of organic solar cells using
machine learning. J Phys Chem Lett 10(22):7277–7284. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b02772
40. Artrith N, Butler KT, Coudert F-X, Han S, Isayev O, Jain A,
Walsh A (2021) Best practices in machine learning for chemistry. Nat Chem 13(6):505–508. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41557-021-00716-z
41. Janet JP, Liu F, Nandy A, Duan C, Yang T, Lin S, Kulik HJ
(2019) Designing in the face of uncertainty: exploiting electronic
structure and machine learning models for discovery in inorganic
chemistry. Inorg Chem 58(16):10592–10606. https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.inorgchem.9b00109
42. Townsend J, Micucci CP, Hymel JH, Maroulas V, Vogiatzis
KD (2020) Representation of molecular structures with
persistent homology for machine learning applications in
chemistry. Nat Commun 11(1):1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-17035-5
43. R RM, Jagan A, Pavithran L, Shrivastava A, Selvaraj SK (2021)
Intelligent welding by using machine learning techniques. Mater
Today 46, 7402–7410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.12.
1149.3rd International Conference on Materials, Manufacturing
and Modelling
44. Quej VH, Almorox J, Arnaldo JA, Saito L (2017) Anfis, svm
and ann soft-computing techniques to estimate daily global solar
radiation in a warm sub-humid environment. J Atmos Solar-Terr
Phys 155:62–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jastp.2017.02.002
45. Ramli MAM, Twaha S, Al-Turki YA (2015) Investigating the
performance of support vector machine and artificial neural
networks in predicting solar radiation on a tilted surface:
Saudi Arabia case study. Energy Convers Manag 105:442–452.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.07.083
46. Cornejo-Bueno L, Casanova-Mateo C, Sanz-Justo J, SalcedoSanz S (2019) Machine learning regressors for solar radiation
estimation from satellite data. Solar Energy 183:768–775.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.03.079
47. Feng Y, Gong D, Zhang Q, Jiang S, Zhao L, Cui N (2019)
Evaluation of temperature-based machine learning and empirical models for predicting daily global solar radiation. Energy
Convers Manag 198:111780. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.encon
man.2019.111780
48. Zhou Y, Liu Y, Wang D, Liu X, Wang Y (2021) A review on
global solar radiation prediction with machine learning models in a comprehensive perspective. Energy Convers Manag
235:113960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2021.113960
49. Narvaez G, Giraldo LF, Bressan M, Pantoja A (2021) Machine
learning for site-adaptation and solar radiation forecasting.
Renew Energy 167:333–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.
2020.11.089
50. Fan J, Wu L, Zhang F, Cai H, Zeng W, Wang X, Zou H (2019)
Empirical and machine learning models for predicting daily
global solar radiation from sunshine duration: a review and
case study in China. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 100:186–212.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.10.018
51. Ümit Aǧbulut, Gürel AE, Biçen Y (2021) Prediction of daily
global solar radiation using different machine learning algorithms: Evaluation and comparison. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
135:110114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110114
52. Cai S, Mao Z, Wang Z, Yin M, Karniadakis GE (2022) Physicsinformed neural networks (pinns) for fluid mechanics: a review.
Acta Mech Sin. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10409-021-01148-1
53. Raissi M, Perdikaris P, Karniadakis GE (2017) Machine learning of linear differential equations using gaussian processes. J
Comput Phys 348:683–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2017.
07.050
54. Yang L, Meng X, Karniadakis GE (2021) B-pinns: Bayesian
physics-informed neural networks for forward and inverse pde
3860 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
problems with noisy data. J Comput Phys 425:109913. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.109913
55. Tohme T, Liu D, Youcef-Toumi K (2022) GSR: a generalized
symbolic regression approach. arXiv. doi:1048550/ARXIV.
2205.15569
56. Papastamatiou K, Sofos F, Karakasidis TE (2022) Machine
learning symbolic equations for diffusion with physics-based
descriptions. AIP Adv 12(2):025004. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0082147
57. Asadzadeh MZ, Gänser H-P, Mücke M (2021) Symbolic regression based hybrid semiparametric modelling of processes: an
example case of a bending process. Appl Eng Sci 6:100049.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apples.2021.100049
58. de Olivetti França, F (2018) A greedy search tree heuristic for
symbolic regression. Inf Sci 442–443:18–32. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ins.2018.02.040
59. Raschka S (2015) Python machine learning. Packt publishing
Ltd, Birmingham, UK.
60. Chatzilygeroudis K, Hatzilygeroudis I, Perikos I (2021) Machine
learning basics. In: Intelligent computing for interactive system
design: Statistics, digital signal processing, and machine learning
in practice (1st ed.) Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, pp. 143–193. https://doi.org/10.1145/3447404.
3447414
61. Alexiadis A (2019) Deep multiphysics: coupling discrete multiphysics with machine learning to attain self-learning in-silico
models replicating human physiology. Artif Intell Med 98:27–34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2019.06.005
62. Hu F, Hao Q (2012) Intelligent sensor networks: the integration
of sensor networks, signal processing and machine learning. Taylor & Francis. https://doi.org/10.1201/b14300
63. Sofos F, Stavrogiannis C, Exarchou-Kouveli KK, Akabua D,
Charilas G, Karakasidis TE (2022) Current trends in fluid
research in the era of artificial intelligence: a review. Fluids.
https://doi.org/10.3390/fluids7030116
64. Nazemi E, Dinca M, Movafeghi A, Rokrok B, Choopan
Dastjerdi MH (2019) Estimation of volumetric water content during imbibition in porous building material using real
time neutron radiography and artificial neural network. Nucl
Instrum Methods Phys Res Sect A 940:344–350. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nima.2019.06.052
65. Ben Chaabene W, Flah M, Nehdi ML (2020) Machine learning prediction of mechanical properties of concrete: critical
review. Constr Build Mater 260:119889. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.119889
66. Poulinakis K, Drikakis D, Kokkinakis IW, Spottswood SM
(2023) Machine-learning methods on noisy and sparse data.
Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11010236
67. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2012) Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Pereira
F, Burges CJ, Bottou L, Weinberger KQ (eds.) Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 25. Curran Associates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2012/file/c3998
62d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf
68. Farabet C, Couprie C, Najman L, LeCun Y (2013) Learning
hierarchical features for scene labeling. IEEE Trans Pattern
Anal Mach Intell 35(8):1915–1929. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPAMI.2012.231
69. Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov,
D., Erhan, D., Vanhoucke, V., Rabinovich, A.: Going deeper
with convolutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2015)
70. Jiang Y-G, Wu Z, Wang J, Xue X, Chang S-F (2018) Exploiting feature and class relationships in video categorization with
regularized deep neural networks. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 40(2):352–364. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.
2017.2670560
71. Hinton G, Deng L, Yu D, Dahl GE, Mohamed A-R, Jaitly N,
Senior A, Vanhoucke V, Nguyen P, Sainath TN, Kingsbury B
(2012) Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech
recognition: the shared views of four research groups. IEEE
Signal Processing Mag 29(6):82–97. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MSP.2012.2205597
72. Leung MKK, Xiong HY, Lee LJ, Frey BJ (2014) Deep learning of the tissue-regulated splicing code. Bioinformatics
30(12):121–129. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu277
73. McConaghy T (2011). In: Riolo R, Vladislavleva E, Moore JH
(eds) FFX: fast, scalable, deterministic symbolic regression
technology. Springer, New York, NY, pp 235–260
74. Koza JR (1994) Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Stat Comput 4(2):87–
112. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00175355
75. Back T (1996) Evolutionary algorithms in theory and practice:
evolution strategies, evolutionary programming, genetic algorithms. Oxford University Press, Oxford
76. Eiben AE, Smith JE et al (2003) Introduction to evolutionary computing. Springer, New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-662-44874-8
77. Quade, M., Gout, J., Abel, M.: Glyph: Symbolic Regression
Tools. arXiv (2018). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1803.
06226
78. Searson, D.P., Leahy, D.E., Willis, M.J.: Gptips: an open
source genetic programming toolbox for multigene symbolic
regression. In: Proceedings of the International Multiconference of Engineers and Computer Scientists, vol. 1, pp. 77–80
(2010). Citeseer
79. Liu C-Y, Senftle TP (2022) Finding physical insights in catalysis
with machine learning. Curr Opin Chem Eng 37:100832. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2022.100832
80. Gilpin W (2021). Chaos as an interpretable benchmark for forecasting and data-driven modelling. https://doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.2110.05266
81. Biggio, L., Bendinelli, T., Neitz, A., Lucchi, A., Parascandolo,
G.: Neural symbolic regression that scales. In: Meila, M., Zhang,
T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 139, pp. 936–945. PMLR (2021). https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v139/biggio21a.html
82. Udrescu S-M, Tegmark M (2021) Symbolic pregression: discovering physical laws from distorted video. Phys Rev E
103:043307. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.103.043307
83. McRee, R.K.: Symbolic regression using nearest neighbor indexing. In: Proceedings of the 12th Annual Conference Companion on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pp. 1983–1990.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1145/1830761.1830841
84. Rivero D, Fernandez-Blanco E, Pazos A (2022) Dome: a deterministic technique for equation development and symbolic
regression. Exp Syst Appl 198:116712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eswa.2022.116712
85. Austel V, Dash S, Gunluk O, Horesh L, Liberti L, Nannicini
G, Schieber B (2017). Globally Optimal Symbolic Regression
arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1710.10720
86. Engle MR, Sahinidis NV (2022) Deterministic symbolic regression with derivative information: General methodology and
application to equations of state. AIChE Journal 68(6):17457.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.17457
87. Valipour, M., You, B., Panju, M., Ghodsi, A.: SymbolicGPT:
a generative transformer model for symbolic regression. arXiv
(2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2106.14131
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3861
1 3
88. Gong C, Bryan J, Furcoiu A, Su Q, Grobe R (2022) Evolutionary
symbolic regression from a probabilistic perspective. SN Comput
Sci 3(3):1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-022-01094-0
89. Brence J, Todorovski L, Džeroski S (2021) Probabilistic grammars for equation discovery. Knowl-Based Syst 224:107077.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.107077
90. Vázquez D, Guimerá R, Sales-Pardo M, Guillén-Gosálbez G
(2022) Automatic modeling of socioeconomic drivers of energy
consumption and pollution using bayesian symbolic regression.
Sustain Prod Consum 30:596–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.
2021.12.025
91. Lucena-Sánchez E, Sciavicco G, Stan IE (2021) Feature and language selection in temporal symbolic regression for interpretable
air quality modelling. Algorithms. https://doi.org/10.3390/a1403
0076
92. Wang C, Zhang Y, Wen C, Yang M, Lookman T, Su Y, Zhang
T-Y (2022) Symbolic regression in materials science via dimension-synchronous-computation. J Mater Sci Technol 122:77–83.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2021.12.052
93. Virgolin, M., Medvet, E., Alderliesten, T., Bosman, P.A.N.: Less
is More: A call to focus on simpler models in genetic programming for interpretable machine learning. arXiv (2022). https://
doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2204.02046
94. Kubalík J, Derner E, Babuška R (2021) Multi-objective symbolic
regression for physics-aware dynamic modeling. Exp Syst Appl
182:115210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115210
95. Wilson D, Miller JF, Cussat-Blanc S, Luga H (2018). Positional
Cartesian genetic programming arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.1810.04119
96. He, B., Lu, Q., Yang, Q., Luo, J., Wang, Z.: Taylor Genetic Programming for Symbolic Regression. arXiv (2022). https://doi.
org/10.48550/ARXIV.2205.09751
97. Zhang H, Zhou A, Qian H, Zhang H (2022) Ps-tree: a piecewise
symbolic regression tree. Swarm Evolut Comput 71:101061.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2022.101061
98. Virgolin, M., Alderliesten, T., Witteveen, C., Bosman, P.A.N.:
Scalable genetic programming by gene-pool optimal mixing
and input-space entropy-based building-block learning. In:
Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference. GECCO ’17, pp. 1041–1048. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1145/3071178.3071287
99. Reinbold PA, Kageorge LM, Schatz MF, Grigoriev RO (2021)
Robust learning from noisy, incomplete, high-dimensional
experimental data via physically constrained symbolic
regression. Nat Commun 12(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-021-23479-0
100. Kronberger G, de Franca FO, Burlacu B, Haider C, Kommenda
M (2022) Shape-constrained symbolic regression-improving
extrapolation with prior knowledge. Evolut Comput 30(1):75–
98. https://doi.org/10.1162/evco_a_00294
101. Karakasidis TE, Sofos F, Tsonos C (2022) The electrical conductivity of ionic liquids: numerical and analytical machine
learning approaches. Fluids. https://doi.org/10.3390/fluids7100
321
102. Icke, I., Bongard, J.C.: Improving genetic programming based
symbolic regression using deterministic machine learning. In:
2013 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 1763–
1770 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2013.6557774
103. Mundhenk, T.N., Landajuela, M., Glatt, R., Santiago, C.P., Faissol, D.M., Petersen, B.K.: Symbolic regression via neural-guided
genetic programming population seeding. arXiv (2021). https://
doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2111.00053
104. Narayanan H, Cruz Bournazou MN, Guillén Gosálbez G, Butté A
(2022) Functional-hybrid modeling through automated adaptive
symbolic regression for interpretable mathematical expressions.
Chem Eng J 430:133032. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.
133032
105. Rad, H.I., Feng, J., Iba, H.: GP-RVM: Genetic Programing-based
Symbolic Regression Using Relevance Vector Machine. arXiv
(2018). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1806.02502
106. de Veloso Melo V, Banzhaf W (2018) Automatic feature engineering for regression models with machine learning: an evolutionary computation and statistics hybrid. Inf Sci 430–431:287–
313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2017.11.041
107. Udrescu S-M, Tegmark M (2019). Ai feynman: a physicsinspired method for symbolic regression. https://doi.org/10.
48550/ARXIV.1905.11481
108. Udrescu, S.-M., Tan, A., Feng, J., Neto, O., Wu, T., Tegmark, M.:
Ai feynman 2.0: pareto-optimal symbolic regression exploiting
graph modularity. In: Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R.,
Balcan, M.F., Lin, H. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 4860–4871. Curran Associates,
Inc.,  (2020). https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/33a
854e247155d590883b93bca53848a-Paper.pdf
109. Kim S, Lu PY, Mukherjee S, Gilbert M, Jing L, Čeperić V,
Soljačić M (2021) Integration of neural network-based symbolic
regression in deep learning for scientific discovery. IEEE Trans
Neural Netw Learn Syst 32(9):4166–4177. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TNNLS.2020.3017010
110. Petersen BK, Landajuela M, Mundhenk TN, Santiago CP, Kim
SK, Kim JT (2019). Deep symbolic regression: recovering mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1912.04871
111. Cranmer M, Tamayo D, Rein H, Battaglia P, Hadden S, Armitage
PJ, Ho S, Spergel DN (2021) A bayesian neural network predicts
the dissolution of compact planetary systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci
118(40):2026053118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2026053118
112. McElreath R (2020) Statistical rethinking: A bayesian course
with examples in R and STAN. Chapman and Hall, CRC texts in
statistical science. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429029608
113. Dubčáková R (2011) Eureqa: software review. Springer, New
York. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10710-010-9124-z
114. Wagner S, Kronberger G, Beham A, Kommenda M,
Scheibenpflug A, Pitzer E, Vonolfen S, Kofler M, Winkler S,
Dorfer V, Affenzeller M (2014). In: Klempous R, Nikodem J,
Jacak W, Chaczko Z (eds) Architecture and design of the HeuristicLab optimization environment. Springer, Heidelberg, pp
197–261. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-01436-4_10
115. La Cava, W., Orzechowski, P., Burlacu, B., de França, F.O., Virgolin, M., Jin, Y., Kommenda, M., Moore, J.H.: Contemporary
Symbolic Regression Methods and their Relative Performance.
arXiv (2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2107.14351
116. Virgolin M, Alderliesten T, Witteveen C, Bosman PAN (2021)
Improving model-based genetic programming for symbolic
regression of small expressions. Evolut Comput 29(2):211–237.
https://doi.org/10.1162/evco_a_00278
117. Ouyang R, Ahmetcik E, Carbogno C, Scheffler M, Ghiringhelli
LM (2019) Simultaneous learning of several materials properties
from incomplete databases with multi-task SISSO. J Phys: Mater
2(2):024002. https://doi.org/10.1088/2515-7639/ab077b
118. Ouyang R, Curtarolo S, Ahmetcik E, Scheffler M, Ghiringhelli
LM (2018) Sisso: a compressed-sensing method for identifying
the best low-dimensional descriptor in an immensity of offered
candidates. Phys Rev Mater 2:083802. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevMaterials.2.083802
119. Kabliman E, Kolody AH, Kommenda M, Kronberger G (2019)
Prediction of stress-strain curves for aluminium alloys using
symbolic regression. AIP Conf Proc 2113(1):180009. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.5112747
120. Vaddireddy H, Rasheed A, Staples AE, San O (2020) Feature
engineering and symbolic regression methods for detecting
3862 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
hidden physics from sparse sensor observation data. Phys Fluids
32(1):015113. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5136351
121. Schmidt M, Lipson H (2009) Distilling free-form natural laws
from experimental data. Science 324(5923):81–85. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1165893
122. Lemos, P., Jeffrey, N., Cranmer, M., Ho, S., Battaglia, P.: Rediscovering orbital mechanics with machine learning. arXiv (2022).
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2202.02306
123. Liu Z, Tegmark M (2021) Machine learning conservation laws
from trajectories. Phys Rev Lett 126:180604. https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.126.180604
124. Matsubara, Y., Chiba, N., Igarashi, R., Taniai, T., Ushiku, Y.:
Rethinking symbolic regression datasets and benchmarks for scientific discovery. arXiv (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.
2206.10540
125. Haider, C., de França, F.O., Burlacu, B., Kronberger, G.: Using
shape constraints for improving symbolic regression models.
arXiv (2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2107.09458
126. Cao W, Zhang W (2022) Data-driven and physical-based identification of partial differential equations for multivariable system.
Theor Appl Mech Lett 12(2):100334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
taml.2022.100334
127. Wilstrup, C., Kasak, J.: Symbolic regression outperforms other
models for small data sets. arXiv (2021). https://doi.org/10.
48550/ARXIV.2103.15147
128. Danai K, La Cava WG (2021) Controller design by symbolic
regression. Mechan Syst Signal Process 151:107348. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107348
129. Wadekar, D., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Ho, S., Perreault-Levasseur, L.: Modeling assembly bias with machine learning and
symbolic regression. arXiv (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.2012.00111
130. Aldeia GSI, de França FO (2022) Interpretability in symbolic
regression: a benchmark of explanatory methods using the Feynman data set. Genetic Program Evol Mach. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10710-022-09435-x
131. Bomarito GF, Leser PE, Strauss NCM, Garbrecht KM, Hochhalter JD (2022) Bayesian model selection for reducing bloat
and overfitting in genetic programming for symbolic regression.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp
526–529. https://doi.org/10.1145/3520304.3528899
132. Dunn A, Wang Q, Ganose A, Dopp D, Jain A (2020) Benchmarking materials property prediction methods: the matbench test
set and automatminer reference algorithm. Npj Comput Mater
6(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00406-3
133. Behler J, Parrinello M (2007) Generalized neural-network representation of high-dimensional potential-energy surfaces. Phys
Rev Lett 98:146401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.
146401
134. Ye T, Pan D, Huang C, Liu M (2019) Smoothed particle hydrodynamics (sph) for complex fluid flows: recent developments in
methodology and applications. Phys Fluids 31(1):011301. https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.5068697
135. Mishin Y (2021) Machine-learning interatomic potentials for
materials science. Acta Mater 214:116980. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.actamat.2021.116980
136. Yang Y, Zhao L, Han C-X, Ding X-D, Lookman T, Sun J, Zong
H-X (2021) Taking materials dynamics to new extremes using
machine learning interatomic potentials. J Mater Inform 1(2):10.
https://doi.org/10.20517/jmi.2021.001
137. Stephenson D, Kermode JR, Lockerby DA (2018) Accelerating
multiscale modelling of fluids with on-the-fly Gaussian process
regression. Microfluidics and Nanofluidics 22(12):1–12. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10404-018-2164-z
138. Hernandez A, Balasubramanian A, Yuan F, Mason SA, Mueller
T (2019) Fast, accurate, and transferable many-body interatomic
potentials by symbolic regression. Npj Comput Mater 5(1):1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-019-0249-1
139. Reimann D, Nidadavolu K, ul Hassan H, Vajragupta N, Glasmachers T, Junker P, Hartmaier A (2019) Modeling macroscopic
material behavior with machine learning algorithms trained by
micromechanical simulations. Front Mater. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmats.2019.00181
140. Kronberger G, Kabliman E, Kronsteiner J, Kommenda M (2022)
Extending a physics-based constitutive model using genetic programming. Appl Eng Sci 9:100080. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apples.2021.100080
141. Zhang X, Chen Z, Liu Y (2017) Chapter 6—constitutive models.
In: Zhang X, Chen Z, Liu Y (eds) The material point method.
Academic Press, Oxford, pp 175–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-407716-4.00006-5
142. Bomarito GF, Townsend TS, Stewart KM, Esham KV, Emery
JM, Hochhalter JD (2021) Development of interpretable, datadriven plasticity models with symbolic regression. Comput
Struct 252:106557. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2021.
106557
143. Versino D, Tonda A, Bronkhorst CA (2017) Data driven modeling of plastic deformation. Comput Methods Appl Mech Eng
318:981–1004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2017.02.016
144. Wang M, Chen C, Liu W (2022) Establish algebraic data-driven
constitutive models for elastic solids with a tensorial sparse symbolic regression method and a hybrid feature selection technique.
J Mech Phys Solids 159:104742. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.
2021.104742
145. Sofos F, Charakopoulos A, Papastamatiou K, Karakasidis TE
(2022) A combined clustering/symbolic regression framework
for fluid property prediction. Phys Fluids 34(6):062004. https://
doi.org/10.1063/5.0096669
146. Alam TM, Allers JP, Leverant CJ, Harvey JA (2022) Symbolic
regression development of empirical equations for diffusion in
Lennard-Jones fluids. J Chem Phys 15(1):014503. https://doi.
org/10.1063/5.0093658
147. Loftis C, Yuan K, Zhao Y, Hu M, Hu J (2021) Lattice thermal
conductivity prediction using symbolic regression and machine
learning. J Phys Chem A 125(1):435–450. https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.jpca.0c08103
148. Xie S, Quan Y, Hire A, Deng B, DeStefano J, Salinas I, Shah
U, Fanfarillo L, Lim J, Kim J et al (2022) Machine learning of superconducting critical temperature from Eliashberg
theory. Npj Comput Mater 8(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41524-021-00666-7
149. Jiang L, Fu H, Zhang H, Xie J (2022) Physical mechanism
interpretation of polycrystalline metals’ yield strength via a
data-driven method: a novel Hall-Petch relationship. Acta
Mater 231:117868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2022.
117868
150. Xiong J, Zhang T, Shi S (2020) Machine learning of mechanical
properties of steels. Sci China Technol Sci 63(7):1247–1255.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431-020-1599-5
151. Seko A, Togo A, Tanaka, I.. (2018). In: Tanaka I (ed) Descriptors
for machine learning of materials data. Springer, Singapore, pp
3–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-7617-6_1
152. He M, Zhang L (2021) Machine learning and symbolic regression investigation on stability of mxene materials. Comput Mater
Sci 196:110578. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2021.
110578
153. Hautier G (2019) Finding the needle in the haystack: materials discovery and design through computational ab initio highthroughput screening. Comput Mater Sci 163:108–116. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2019.02.040
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3863
1 3
154. Wang Y, Wagner N, Rondinelli JM (2019) Symbolic regression
in materials science. MRS Commun 9(3):793–805. https://doi.
org/10.1557/mrc.2019.85
155. Weng B, Song Z, Zhu R, Yan Q, Sun Q, Grice CG, Yan Y, Yin
W-J (2020) Simple descriptor derived from symbolic regression
accelerating the discovery of new perovskite catalysts. Nat Commun 11(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17263-9
156. Praks P, Brkić D (2018) Symbolic regression-based genetic
approximations of the colebrook equation for flow friction.
Water. https://doi.org/10.3390/w10091175
157. Milošević M, Brkić D, Praks P, Litričin D, Stajić Z (2022)
Hydraulic losses in systems of conduits with flow from laminar
to fully turbulent: a new symbolic regression formulation. Axioms. https://doi.org/10.3390/axioms11050198
158. Hamidia M, Ganjizadeh A (2022) Post-earthquake damage evaluation of non-ductile rc moment frames using surface crack patterns. Struct Control Health Monitor. https://doi.org/10.1002/stc.
3024
159. Mansourdehghan S, Dolatshahi KM, Asjodi AH (2022) Datadriven damage assessment of reinforced concrete shear walls
using visual features of damage. J Build Eng 53:104509. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2022.104509
160. Imran Latif QBA, Memon ZA, Mahmood Z, Qureshi MU, Milad
A (2022) A machine learning model for the prediction of concrete penetration by the ogive nose rigid projectile. Appl Sci.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app12042040
161. Naser MZ (2019) Heuristic machine cognition to predict fireinduced spalling and fire resistance of concrete structures. Autom
Constr 106:102916. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2019.
102916
162. Rezaei H, Zarfam P, Golafshani EM, Amiri GG (2022) Seismic
fragility analysis of rc box-girder bridges based on symbolic
regression method. Structures 38:306–322. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.istruc.2021.12.058
163. Gan L, Wu H, Zhong Z (2022) Integration of symbolic regression and domain knowledge for interpretable modeling of
remaining fatigue life under multistep loading. Int J Fatigue
161:106889. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.106889
164. Ren J, Zhang L, Zhao H, Zhao Z, Wang S (2022) Determination of the fatigue equation for the cement-stabilized cold
recycled mixtures with road construction waste materials based
on data-driven. Int J Fatigue 158:106765. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.106765
165. Ben Chaabene W, Nehdi ML (2021) Genetic programming
based symbolic regression for shear capacity prediction of
sfrc beams. Constr Build Mater 280:122523. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2021.122523
166. Sonolikar RR, Patil MP, Mankar RB, Tambe SS, Kulkarni BD
(2017) Genetic programming based drag model with improved
prediction accuracy for fluidization systems. Int J Chem React
Eng 15(2):20160210. https://doi.org/10.1515/ijcre-2016-0210
167. Ma L, Guo Q, Li X, Xu S, Zhou J, Ye M, Liu Z (2022) Drag
correlations for flow past monodisperse arrays of spheres and
porous spheres based on symbolic regression: effects of permeability. Chem Eng J 445:136653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.
2022.136653
168. Tang Y, Peters EAJF, Kuipers JAM, Kriebitzsch SHL, van der
Hoef MA (2015) A new drag correlation from fully resolved
simulations of flow past monodisperse static arrays of spheres.
AIChE J 61(2): 688–698. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.14645
169. El Hasadi YMF, Padding JT (2023) Do logarithmic terms exist
in the drag coefficient of a single sphere at high Reynolds numbers? Chem Eng Sci 265:118195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.
2022.118195
170. Alhuthali S, Delaplace G, Macchietto S, Bouvier L (2022)
Whey protein fouling prediction in plate heat exchanger by
combining dynamic modelling, dimensional analysis, and symbolic regression. Food Bioprod Process 134:163–180. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2022.05.009
171. Neumann P, Cao L, Russo D, Vassiliadis VS, Lapkin AA
(2020) A new formulation for symbolic regression to identify
physico-chemical laws from experimental data. Chem Eng J
387:123412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.123412
172. Farizhandi AAK, Zhao H, Chen T, Lau R (2020) Evaluation of
material properties using planetary ball milling for modeling
the change of particle size distribution in a gas-solid fluidized
bed using a hybrid artificial neural network-genetic algorithm
approach. Chemical Engineering Science 215:115469. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2020.115469
173. Bahonar E, Chahardowli M, Ghalenoei Y, Simjoo M (2022)
New correlations to predict oil viscosity using data mining
techniques. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering
208:109736. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2021.109736
174. Hashemizadeh A, Bahonar E, Chahardowli M, Kheirollahi
H, Simjoo M (2022) A data-driven approach to estimate the
rate of penetration in drilling of hydrocarbon reservoirs. PREPRINT (version 1), available at Research Square. https://doi.
org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1740481/v1
175. Thorat R, Bruining H (2016) Determination of the most significant variables affecting the steady state pressure drop in
selected foam flow experiments. Journal of Petroleum Science
and Engineering 141:144–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.
2015.12.001
176. Yang G, Li X, Wang J, Lian L, Ma T (2015) Modeling oil production based on symbolic regression. Energy Policy 82:48–
61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.02.016
177. MoradiDowlatabad M, Jamiolahmady M (2018) New approach
for predicting multiple fractured horizontal wells performance
in tight reservoirs. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 162:233–243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2017.12.040
178. Kamari A, Gharagheizi F, Mohammadi AH, Ramjugernath D
(2016) A corresponding states-based method for the estimation
of natural gas compressibility factors. Journal of Molecular Liquids 216:25–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2015.12.103
179. Izadmehr M, Shams R, Ghazanfari MH (2016) New correlations
for predicting pure and impure natural gas viscosity. Journal of
Natural Gas Science and Engineering 30:364–378. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jngse.2016.02.026
180. Abooali D, Khamehchi E (2014) Estimation of dynamic viscosity of natural gas based on genetic programming methodology.
Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering 21:1025–1031.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2014.11.006
181. Abooali D, Khamehchi E (2019) New predictive method for
estimation of natural gas hydrate formation temperature using
genetic programming. Neural Comput Appl 31(7):2485–2494.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-017-3208-0
182. Rostami A, Shokrollahi A (2017) Accurate prediction of water
dewpoint temperature in natural gas dehydrators using gene
expression programming approach. J Mol Liq 243:196–204.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2017.08.045
183. Kerlin TW, Upadhyaya BR (2019) Chapter 8—reactor control.
In: Kerlin TW, Upadhyaya BR (eds) Dynamics and control of
nuclear reactors. Academic Press, Cambridge, pp 89–104. https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815261-4.00008-1
184. Shmalko E, Diveev A (2021) Control synthesis as machine learning control by symbolic regression methods. Appl Sci. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app11125468
185. Geng X, Mao X, Wu H-H, Wang S, Xue W, Zhang G, Ullah A,
Wang H (2022) A hybrid machine learning model for predicting
continuous cooling transformation diagrams in welding heataffected zone of low alloy steels. J Mater Sci Technol 107:207–
215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2021.07.038
3864 D. Angelis et al.
1 3
186. Shen J, Kotha S, Noraas R, Venkatesh V, Ghosh S (2022) Developing parametrically upscaled constitutive and crack nucleation
models for the ti64 alloy. Int J Plast 151:103182. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijplas.2021.103182
187. Liu H, Lin H, Jiang X, Mao X, Liu Q, Li B (2019) Estimation
of mass matrix in machine tool’s weak components research
by using symbolic regression. Comput Ind Eng 127:998–1011.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.11.033
188. Kabliman E, Kolody AH, Kronsteiner J, Kommenda M, Kronberger G (2021) Application of symbolic regression for constitutive modeling of plastic deformation. Appl Eng Sci 6:100052.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apples.2021.100052
189. Hale WT, Safikou E, Bollas GM (2022) Inference of faults
through symbolic regression of system data. Comput Chem
Eng 157:107619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2021.
107619
190. Nembhard DA, Sun Y (2019) A symbolic genetic programming
approach for identifying models of learning-by-doing. Comput
Ind Eng 131:524–533. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.08.020
191. Jeong H, Kim JH, Choi S-H, Lee S, Heo I, Kim KS (2022)
Semantic cluster operator for symbolic regression and its applications. Adv Eng Softw 172:103174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
advengsoft.2022.103174
192. Amir Haeri M, Ebadzadeh MM, Folino G (2017) Statistical
genetic programming for symbolic regression. Appl Soft Comput
60:447–469. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.06.050
193. Mousavi Astarabadi SS, Ebadzadeh MM (2018) A decomposition method for symbolic regression problems. Appl Soft Comput 62:514–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.10.041
194. Žegklitz J, Pošík P (2019) Symbolic regression in dynamic
scenarios with gradually changing targets. Appl Soft Comput
83:105621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2019.105621
195. Derner E, Kubalík J, Ancona N, Babuška R (2020) Constructing parsimonious analytic models for dynamic systems via
symbolic regression. Appl Soft Comput 94:106432. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106432
196. Sambo AS, Azad RMA, Kovalchuk Y, Indramohan VP, Shah
H (2021) Evolving simple and accurate symbolic regression
models via asynchronous parallel computing. Appl Soft Comput 104:107198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2021.107198
197. Wadekar, D., Thiele, L., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Hill, J.C.,
Cranmer, M., Spergel, D.N., Battaglia, N., Anglés-Alcázar,
D., Hernquist, L., Ho, S.: Augmenting astrophysical scaling
relations with machine learning : application to reducing the
SZ flux-mass scatter. arXiv (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.2201.01305
198. Shao H, Villaescusa-Navarro F, Genel S, Spergel DN, AnglésAlcázar D, Hernquist L, Davé R, Narayanan D, Contardo G,
Vogelsberger M (2022) Finding universal relations in subhalo
properties with artificial intelligence. Astrophys J 927(1):85.
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac4d30
199. Delgado AM, Wadekar D, Hadzhiyska B, Bose S, Hernquist L,
Ho S (2022) Modelling the galaxy-halo connection with machine
learning. Mon Not R Astron Soc 515(2):2733–2746. https://doi.
org/10.1093/mnras/stac1951
200. Matchev KT, Matcheva K, Roman A (2022) Analytical modeling
of exoplanet transit spectroscopy with dimensional analysis and
symbolic regression. Astrophys J 930(1):33. https://doi.org/10.
3847/1538-4357/ac610c
201. Manzi, M., Vasile, M.: Orbital anomaly reconstruction using
deep symbolic regression. In: 71st International Astronautical
Congress (2020)
202. Barsotti D, Cerino F, Tiglio M, Villanueva A (2022) Gravitational wave surrogates through automated machine learning.
Class Quantum Grav 39(8):085011. https://doi.org/10.1088/
1361-6382/ac5ba1
203. Arjona R, Lin H-N, Nesseris S, Tang L (2021) Machine learning
forecasts of the cosmic distance duality relation with strongly
lensed gravitational wave events. Phys Rev D 103:103513.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.103.103513
204. Shepherd SJ, Zharkov SI, Zharkova VV (2014) Prediction of
solar activity from solar background magnetic field variations
in cycles 21–23. Astrophys J 795(1):46. https://doi.org/10.1088/
0004-637x/795/1/46
205. Yang G, Sun T, Wang J, Li X (2015) Modeling the nexus between
carbon dioxide emissions and economic growth. Energy Policy
86:104–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.06.031
206. Pan I, Pandey DS, Das S (2013) Global solar irradiation prediction using a multi-gene genetic programming approach. J Renew
Sustain Energy 5(6):063129. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4850495
207. Al-Hajj R, Assi A, Fouad M, Mabrouk E (2021) A hybrid lstmbased genetic programming approach for short-term prediction
of global solar radiation using weather data. Processes. https://
doi.org/10.3390/pr9071187
208. Massaoudi, M., Chihi, I., Sidhom, L., Trabelsi, M., Refaat, S.S.,
Oueslati, F.S.: Enhanced Evolutionary Symbolic regression via
genetic programming for PV power forecasting. arXiv (2019).
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1910.10065
209. Abdellaoui, I.A., Mehrkanoon, S.: Symbolic regression for scientific discovery: an application to wind speed forecasting. In:
2021 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI), pp. 01–08 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/SSCI50451.
2021.9659860
210. Valsaraj P, Thumba DA, Asokan K, Kumar KS (2020) Symbolic
regression-based improved method for wind speed extrapolation
from lower to higher altitudes for wind energy applications. Appl
Energy 260:114270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.
114270
211. Pan X, Zhang J, Li C, Pan X, Song J (2019) Analysis of China’s
regional wind power generation efficiency and its influencing
factors. Energy Environ 30(2):254–271. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0958305X18788820
212. Rueda R, Cuéllar MP, Pegalajar MC, Delgado M (2019) Straight
line programs for energy consumption modelling. Appl Soft
Comput 80:310–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2019.04.001
213. Wenninger S, Kaymakci C, Wiethe C (2022) Explainable longterm building energy consumption prediction using qlattice. Appl
Energy 308:118300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.
118300
214. Kefer K, Hanghofer R, Kefer P, Stöger M, Hofer B, Affenzeller
M, Winkler S (2022) Simulation-based optimization of residential energy flows using white box modeling by genetic programming. Energy Build 258:111829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbui
ld.2021.111829
215. Pan X, Uddin MK, Ai B, Pan X, Saima U (2019) Influential factors of carbon emissions intensity in oecd countries: evidence
from symbolic regression. J Clean Prod 220:1194–1201. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.02.195
216. Liu H, Zhang Z (2022) Probing the carbon emissions in 30
regions of china based on symbolic regression and tapio decoupling. Environ Sci Pollut Res 29(2):2650–2663. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11356-021-15648-x
217. Domínguez-Sáez A, Rattá GA, Barrios CC (2018) Prediction
of exhaust emission in transient conditions of a diesel engine
fueled with animal fat using artificial neural network and symbolic regression. Energy 149:675–683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2018.02.080
218. Hughes, J.A., Houghten, S., Brown, J.A.: Gait model analysis of
parkinson’s disease patients under cognitive load. In: 2020 IEEE
Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp. 1–8 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC48606.2020.9185621
Artificial Intelligence in Physical Sciences: Symbolic Regression Trends and Perspectives 3865
1 3
219. Alaa AM, Gurdasani D, Harris AL, Rashbass J, van der Schaar
M (2021) Machine learning to guide the use of adjuvant therapies
for breast cancer. Nat Mach Intell 3(8):716–726. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42256-021-00353-8
220. Goyal, R.: A symbolic regression approach to hepatocellular carcinoma diagnosis using hypermethylated cpg islands in circulating cell-free dna. medRxiv (2022). https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.
01.25.22269799
221. Golap MA-U, Raju SMTU, Haque MR, Hashem MMA (2021)
Hemoglobin and glucose level estimation from ppg characteristics features of fingertip video using mggp-based model. Biomed
Signal Process Control 67:102478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bspc.2021.102478
222. Virgolin, M., Alderliesten, T., Bel, A., Witteveen, C., Bosman,
P.A.N.: Symbolic regression and feature construction with gpgomea applied to radiotherapy dose reconstruction of childhood
cancer survivors. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pp. 1395–1402. Association for
Computing Machinery, (2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3205455.
3205604
223. Dasgupta P, Hughes JA, Daley M, Sejdić E (2021) Is human
walking a network medicine problem? An analysis using symbolic regression models with genetic programming. Comput
Methods Progr Biomed 206:106104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cmpb.2021.106104
224. Wilstrup C, Cave C (2022) Combining symbolic regression with
the cox proportional hazards model improves prediction of heart
failure deaths. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 22(1):1–7. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12911-022-01943-1
225. Cox DR (1972) Regression models and life-tables. J R Statistical
Soc: Ser B (Methodol) 34(2):187–202. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
2517-6161.1972.tb00899.x
226. Wilstrup, C., Hedley, P.L., Rode, L., Placing, S., Wøjdemann,
K.R., Shalmi, A.-C., Sundberg, K., Christiansen, M.: Symbolic regression analysis of interactions between first trimester maternal serum adipokines in pregnancies which develop
pre-eclampsia. medRxiv (2022). https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.
06.29.22277072
227. Claveria O, Monte E, Torra S (2022) A genetic programming
approach for economic forecasting with survey expectations.
Appl Sci. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12136661
228. Kronberger G, Fink S, Kommenda M, Affenzeller M (2011)
Macro-economic time series modeling and interaction networks.
In: Di Chio C, Brabazon A, Di Caro GA, Drechsler R, Farooq M,
Grahl J, Greenfield G, Prins C, Romero J, Squillero G, Tarantino
E, Tettamanzi AGB, Urquhart N, Uyar AŞ (eds) Appl Evol Comput. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 101–110
229. Drachal, K.: Analysis of Bayesian Symbolic Regression Applied
to Crude Oil Price. In: Sinteza 2022 - International Scientific
Conference on Information Technology and Data Related
Research, pp. 3–13 (2022). https://doi.org/10.15308/Sinte
za-2022-3-13
230. Claveria O, Monte E, Torra S (2017) Using survey data to forecast real activity with evolutionary algorithms. a cross-country
analysis. J Appl Econ 20(2):329–349. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1514-0326(17)30015-6
231. Claveria O, Monte E, Torra S (2019) Empirical modelling of
survey-based expectations for the design of economic indicators
in five european regions. Empirica 46(2):205–227. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10663-017-9395-1
232. Claveria O, Monte E, Torra S (2020) Economic forecasting with
evolved confidence indicators. Econ Modell 93:576–585. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.econmod.2020.09.015
233. Koza, J.R.: A genetic approach to econometric modeling. In:
Sixth World Congress of the Econometric Society, Barcelona,
Spain, vol. 27 (1990)
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.