Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3735634
SURVEY
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression
JUNLAN DONG, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China
JINGHUI ZHONG, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China
Open Access Support provided by:
South China University of Technology
PDF Download
3735634.pdf
07 April 2026
Total Citations: 13
Total Downloads:
3762
Published: 11 June 2025
Online AM: 13 May 2025
Accepted: 29 April 2025
Revised: 15 April 2025
Received: 13 July 2024
Citation in BibTeX format
ACM Computing Surveys, Volume 57, Issue 11 (November 2025)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3735634
EISSN: 1557-7341
.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression
JUNLAN DONG, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
JINGHUI ZHONG, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
Symbolic regression (SR) is an optimization problem that identifies the most suitable mathematical expression or model to fit the observed dataset. Over the past decade, SR has experienced rapid development due to
its interpretability and broad applicability, leading to numerous algorithms for addressing SR problems and a
steady increase in practical applications. Given the lack of a comprehensive review of the current literature
on SR and its significance to both academia and industry, this article provides an in-depth overview of SR. The
survey begins by outlining the background of SR and introducing it from three aspects: its definition, benchmarking datasets, and evaluation metrics. We also highlight the latest advancements in SR, summarizing the
current research status. The review focuses on deterministic methods, genetic programming methods, and
neural network methods, offering a thorough analysis of the advantages and limitations of various algorithms.
Following this, key application scenarios of SR are introduced, and some commonly used software tools are
summarized. Finally, the article provides an outlook on future research directions. This survey reviews the
latest developments in SR and offers insightful guidance for readers who are new to the field.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Surveys and overviews;• Computing methodologies →
Modeling and simulation;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Symbolic regression, interpretable AI, genetic programming, neural network
ACM Reference Format:
Junlan Dong and Jinghui Zhong. 2025. Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression. ACM Comput. Surv. 57, 11,
Article 290 (June 2025), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3735634
1 Introduction
Symbolic regression aims at discovering mathematical expressions that describe the relationships
between variables in the observed dataset [101, 183], which has been proved to be NP-hard
[188, 208]. The computational resources required for solving SR are closely linked to the specific
method category chosen. Compared to other machine learning algorithms, SR offers several distinct advantages. (1) No predefined model structure: Unlike traditional methods, SR does not rely
on a fixed model form; (2) Interpretability: It can automatically generate concise, human-readable
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant 62476096, and in part by the
Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2023A1515012291.
Author’s Contact Information: Junlan Dong, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; email: eru-dd@foxmail.com; Jinghui Zhong (Corresponding author), South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China; e-mail: jinghuizhong@gmail.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 0360-0300/2025/06-ART290
https://doi.org/10.1145/3735634
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:2 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Fig. 1. Total publications and citations referring to SR by years from Web of Science until December 2024.
The line chart shows the percentage of SR-related articles in CS by year.
mathematical expressions, facilitating a better understanding of model behavior and the underlying data relationships [100, 209]; (3) Strong extrapolation: SR often outperforms other algorithms
in scenarios with limited training data, demonstrating superior extrapolation capabilities [215].
The origins of SR trace back to Kepler’s trial-and-error approach [91] and Newton’s laws of motion [158], which utilized symbolic models to fit experimental data. The term “symbolic regression”
had not emerged in the 1970s. Sampson[181] introduced the concept of “adaptation" and explored
genetic algorithms for adaptive modeling and automated search set the stage for its development.
Building on this, Koza [103] formalized Genetic Programming (GP) in the 1980s, applying natural selection principles to evolve computer programs, which laid a critical groundwork for SR. The
1990s saw SR gaining recognition as an independent research field. Koza’s GP was widely applied
to function regression, marking the rise of SR [102], while Kinnear’s comprehensive work on GP
further advanced its theoretical framework [96]. Subsequent studies introduced innovations such
as enhanced representations and improved genetic operators to boost SR’s efficiency and versatility [10, 99, 165, 186]. In the 21st century, SR has reached a state of maturity, with its applications
expanding across a wide range of domains. Notably, the pioneering work by Schmidt and Lipson
on extracting natural laws using SR demonstrated its immense potential for scientific discovery,
laying a strong foundation for its use in data-driven research [183]. In recent years, the integration
of neural networks (NNs) into SR has garnered significant attention. NNs, with their robust nonlinear modeling capabilities, have addressed some inherent limitations of GP, thereby catalyzing
further advancements in the field [19, 19, 73, 170]. The versatility of SR is evident in its successful
deployment across diverse applications, such as uncovering insights in scientific research, enhancing software development and maintenance, and driving innovation in industrial design [95, 231].
Over the past few decades, SR has garnered growing attention within the research community.
As shown in Figure 1, there has been a notable year-over-year increase in published SR articles in
recent years, underscoring the sustained interest among researchers in this field. The prominence
of SR can be attributed to its unique capability in generate potentially interpretable mathematical
expressions. This ability allows SR to unveil underlying patterns in data, offering profound insights
for scientists, engineers, and researchers.
Compared to the rapid development of SR, there is currently limited comprehensive literature
reviewing the latest research progress on SR methods. Angelis et al. [8] conducted an initial
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:3
Fig. 2. Organization of the survey.
exploration of SR from a physics standpoint, emphasizing its practical applications. Makke et al.
[136] discussed SR methods by categorizing them into linear and nonlinear approaches. However,
these articles mainly focus on general concepts or specific techniques of SR. So far, no survey has
summarized the latest advancements in SR, the commonly used tools, and the exciting subtopics
within this field. Therefore, this review will comprehensively cover these aspects, aiming at filling
this gap in the existing research. The contributions of this article are as follows:
— Organization of Resources and Practical References. This review summarizes commonly
used datasets and evaluation metrics in SR. Providing these foundational resources enables
researchers to grasp key concepts quickly and seamlessly transition into practical applications.
— Systematic Categorization and Methodological Review. SR methods are systematically classified into three major categories based on their core principles and technical approaches:
deterministic methods, GP-based methods, and NN-based methods. This categorization reflects a paradigm shift in symbolic regression from rule-based and heuristic evolution to
data-driven learning. Deterministic methods follow predefined rules or enumerative strategies; GP-based methods rely on stochastic symbolic search (e.g., mutation and crossover); in
contrast, NN-based methods integrate structure and parameter learning within differentiable
frameworks using gradient-based optimization. For each category, this review provides an
in-depth analysis of representative works, applicable scenarios, and technical characteristics,
offering a clear understanding of their strengths and limitations.
— Comprehensive Survey on Tools and Applications. This review compiles advanced SR methods and software tools, facilitating efficient research and application development. Additionally, it explores SR’s popular applications in fields such as engineering and physical modeling
and proposes potential future directions, offering a comprehensive view and guidance for
further exploration.
The remainder of the article is organized as shown in Figure 2. Section 2 introduces the background, including problem definitions, benchmark datasets, and evaluation criteria. Sections 3–5
focus on methods: Section 3 details deterministic methods, Section 4 reviews GP-based approaches,
and Section 5 discusses NN-based methods. Section 6 presents ten advanced methods currently in
use. Section 7 covers representative SR applications, Section 8 summarizes common tools and software, Section 9 outlines future directions, and Section 10 concludes the article.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:4 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Fig. 3. Some examples of ESR.
2 Background of SR
This section offers the relevant background on SR to help readers understand its concepts and
applications better. Additionally, it outlines commonly used SR datasets for training and evaluating
the performance of SR models.
2.1 Problem Definition
SR aims at discovering mathematical expressions that accurately model the relationship between
input and output variables, without assuming a predefined functional form. SR can be broadly
categorized into two types: Explicit Symbolic Regression (ESR) and Implicit Symbolic Regression (ISR).
ESR: The goal of ESR is to identify an explicit functional form that represents the observed data,
as illustrated in Figure 3. Give a dataset D = {xi,yi }N
i=1, N is the number of data observations;
xi ∈ Rd is the input variables, yi ∈ R is the output. The loss function of ESR can be described as
L(f ) =

N
i=1
l(f (xi),yi). (1)
A common choice for loss functions is the squared variance between the output and the prediction,
i.e., L(f ) = N
i=1(yi −f (xi))2. Certainly, alternative evaluation criteria can be used based on specific
needs, such as complexity, runtime, and so on. The optimization goal of ESR is to find the optimal
explicit expression f ∗ over the set of functions that minimizes the loss function:
f ∗ = arg min
f
L(f ). (2)
ISR: The goal of ISR is to identify an implicit functional form that represents the observed data,
as illustrated in Figure 4. The loss function of ISR can be described as
H(F ) =

N
i=1
h(F (Xinput), 0), (3)
where Xinput ∈ Rd is the input vector that contains several variables from the observed dataset,
N is the number of data observations. Searching for implicit functions is particularly challenging
because error measures are difficult to define. At present, there are some preliminary explorations
of work [37, 184]. The optimization goal of ISR is to find the optimal implicit expression F ∗ over
the set of functions that minimizes the loss function:
F ∗ = arg min
F
H(F ). (4)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:5
Fig. 4. Some examples of ISR.
Table 1. Benchmarking Datasets For SR
Datasets Types Problems Applicability Limitations
HO PO CO ST LV LD CF HC
Koza [101] Classic 3  
Nguyen [198] Classic 12 
Korns [99] Classic 15 
Keijzer [89] Classic 15 
Vladislavleva [209] Classic 8 
R[105] Classic 3
Jin [81] Classic 6  
Livermore [170] Classic 22 
AI Feynman [196] Physical 120 
SRSD [142] Physical 240
Zhong [238] Implicit 23 
Strogatz [190] ODE 10
PMLB [163] Synthetic, Real-word –
UCI [11] Synthetic, Real-word –
OpenML [202] Synthetic, Real-word –
SRBench [117] Synthetic, Real-word 252
SRBench++ [52] Synthetic, Real-word 252
High Order problems (HO), Polynomial problems (PO), Coefficient optimization problems (CO), and Specific type
problems (ST). “LV” indicates Lack of variety; “LD” indicates low dimension; “CF” indicates complex feature; “HC”
indicates high computational cost;
ISR has stronger expressive power compared to ESR. Further, ISR simplifies the functional representation between variables. For example, an implicit function like x2 +y2 −1 = 0 can describe a
circle, while the explicit form would require two separate expressionsy = ±
√
1 − x2. Consequently,
searching for implicit functions is more challenging, as the relationships between the observed data
are often more complex. We will introduce the research on ISR in the following Section 4.1.3.
2.2 Benchmarking Datasets
In this subsection, we present an overview of various datasets used to test SR, including classic
SR datasets, physical datasets, and real-world datasets. Table 1 provides specific details for these
datasets. At the same time, we also summarized the applicability and limitations of each dataset.
These classic datasets, primarily compiled by researchers including Koza, Nguyen, Korns,
Keijzer, and Vladislavleva, were specifically designed for evaluating SR algorithms. Typically,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:6 J. Dong and J. Zhong
these datasets contain no more than five variables. For further details, refer to [144]. AI Feynman
dataset10 is generated from 100 equations selected from “The Feynman Lectures on Physics”,
covering classical mechanics, electromagnetism, quantum mechanics, and other physics topics. Additionally, the dataset includes 20 more challenging “bonus” equations extracted from
other significant physics books. Further, SRSD10 extended a dataset comprising 120 equations
redesigned based on AI Feynman. Strogatz dataset10 is an Ordinary Differential Equation
(ODE) database, where each dataset represents a state of a two-state system described by a
differential equation. Each dataset represents a natural process exhibiting chaotic and nonlinear
dynamics. Penn Machine Learning Benchmarks, commonly known as Penn ML Benchmarks
or PMLB10, is a collection of benchmark datasets used for evaluating the performance of machine
learning algorithms. UCI datasets10, provided by the University of California, Irvine, constitute a
diverse collection spanning multiple domains for machine learning research. OpenML datasets10
are a collection of extensive, open machine learning datasets provided by the OpenML platform.
This platform aims at serving as a centralized hub for sharing, discovering, and analyzing machine
learning datasets. OpenML datasets cover various domains, including classification, regression,
clustering, and tasks of different sizes and complexities. SRBench10 includes 252 datasets from
PMLB, covering both real-world and synthetic scenarios with or without ground-truth models.
SRBench++10 examines 252 datasets across two categories: Black-box Regression Problems
(122 datasets) from PMLB without known ground-truth models, and Ground-truth Regression
Problems (130 datasets) with known models, including those from the Feynman and ODE-Strogatz
databases.
2.3 Evaluation Metrics
We have reviewed relevant literature and categorized the evaluation metrics for SR into three main
aspects: (1) accuracy, (2) interpretability, and (3) cost.
For accuracy, commonly used metrics include Mean Squared Error (MSE), root mean square
error (RMSE), and normalized mean squared error (NMSE), which are widely adopted in regression algorithms. Additionally, R2(R-Square) is frequently used in SR. Extrapolation capability is another key evaluation dimension, focusing on the final solution’s performance on different
datasets, especially unseen ones.
The evaluation of interpretability is less rigorous and standardized compared to accuracy
[72, 223]. It generally includes the following aspects: solution simplicity, structural similarity, and
dimensional homogeneity. Generally, the simpler the solution, the stronger its interpretability. Solution simplicity refers to the number of nodes, the depth of the expression tree, and the number
of input variables. Dimensional homogeneity evaluation checks whether the units of the variables
in the formulas generated by SR match and ensures dimensional balance in the formula, validating the model’s physical or engineering applicability. Structural similarity measures the degree
of alignment between the solution’s structure and the expected patterns or known rules. This is
crucial as it helps identify models that are not only accurate but also align with prior knowledge or
expected system behavior. Finally, the evaluation can be performed by calculating the cost, which
includes factors such as training time and resource consumption, offering a comprehensive assessment of the algorithm’s efficiency and practicality. Table 2 summarizes the evaluation metrics of
SR and gives some literature for readers’ reference.
3 Deterministic Methods
The deterministic approach to SR aims at constructing mathematical expressions through systematic, non-random search strategies. This section mainly introduces three categories: brute force
search, mathematical programming, and Fast Function Extraction.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:7
Table 2. Evaluation Metrics Of SR
Evaluation Criterion Sub-indicators References
Accuracy
• MSE/RMSE/NRMSE/... [3, 7, 16, 19, 36, 70, 81, 84, 128, 228, 237]
•R2 [52, 82, 101, 117, 156, 176, 192, 194, 215]
• Extrapolation Ability [52, 140, 179, 229]
Interpretability
• Simplicity [23, 82, 123, 203, 219, 225]
• Structural similarity [71, 156]
• Dimensional Homogeneity [65, 92, 177, 178]
Cost
• Training Time [34, 82, 93, 225]
• Evaluation Time [24, 180]
• Resource Consumption [20, 137]
3.1 Brute-force Search
Brute force search exhaustively explores all mathematical expressions to find optimal models. For
example, Priority Grammar Enumeration (PGE)[217] uses grammar rules to guide the search
from simple to complex equations, while AI Feynman [196] applies brute force to derive physics
subexpressions. Although it ensures global optimality, its computational cost grows exponentially
with variable dimensions. To address this, Kronberger et al. [109] constrained syntax by generating
fixed-length models and clustering them, and Kammerer et al. [84] combined context-free grammar
with heuristic optimization. Bartlett et al. [16] introduced Exhaustive SR, which systematically
explores equations within set constraints and leverages parallelization for efficiency.
3.2 Mathematical Programming
In SR, mixed-integer programming (MIP)[14] is a commonly used deterministic method, but
its computational efficiency is low. To improve efficiency, Austel et al. [13] combined mixed-integer
nonlinear optimization with explicit enumeration and dimensional analysis constraints. Kim et al.
[93] introduced new cuts for mixed-integer nonlinear programs (MINLPs) and developed a
heuristic for iteratively constructing expression trees. Neumann et al. [157] enhanced MINLP efficiency by representing equations as directed acyclic graphs, reducing binary variables. Engle and
Sahinidis [64] proposed a deterministic MINLP formulation, leveraging auxiliary expression trees
and the chain rule for efficient derivative computation.
3.3 Fast Function Extraction
Fast Function Extraction (FFX)[143] is a deterministic method using elastic-net regression for
SR, known for its efficiency and scalability. Kammerer et al. [85] enhanced FFX with Nonlinear
Least Squares (NLS) optimization and a variable projection algorithm, yielding simpler models.
Vaddireddy and San [200] applied FFX to discover partial differential equations (PDEs), using
compressive sensing and sparse optimization for feature selection and parameter estimation, generating multiple models and optimizing complexity, and accuracy through non-dominated sorting.
3.4 Summary
Deterministic methods in SR offer significant advantages, including ensuring the discovery of globally optimal solutions, generating mathematically interpretable expressions, and demonstrating
high stability and reliability. However, these methods face high computational complexity, particularly as problem complexity and dimensionality increase, leading to search space explosion, long
computation times, and reliance on specific problem structures. Potential improvements include
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:8 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Fig. 5. The summary map of GPs.
combining deterministic methods with heuristic algorithms to reduce computational costs while
retaining accuracy, introducing constraints or prioritization rules to optimize search efficiency, and
utilizing modern parallel computing and distributed systems to accelerate evaluating of complex
problems.
4 GP-based Methods
The research directions of GP-based methods mainly cover three key areas, as shown in Figure 5.
First, innovation in the core elements of GP, including novel chromosome representations,
optimization operator designs, and improvements to fitness functions. Second, the exploration
of strategies that utilize additional information, such as semantic-driven and knowledge-driven
GP methods, to further enhance algorithm efficiency and performance. Lastly, emerging research
focuses on improving interpretability and utilizing parallel computing techniques.
4.1 Basic Elements Innovation
GP is an evolutionary algorithm that evolves a population of candidate programs or expressions
to solve a given task. It starts with a randomly generated population and iteratively applies selection, crossover, and mutation based on a fitness function. Key components such as chromosome
representation, fitness evaluation, and genetic operators jointly determine the search process and
performance. The following sections describe these elements in detail.
4.1.1 Chromosome Representation. Chromosome representation is critical in GP, directly affecting its capability to model and optimize problems. Common encoding methods include treebased[235, 237], linear[76], graph-based[138], and grammar-based representations[134]. Figure 6
illustrates the chromosome representation of four types.
— Tree-based encoding has a simple structure and is suitable for recursive structures and expression modeling. It is commonly used in SR, classification problems, and computer algebra
systems that require hierarchical representations.
— Linear encoding is concise and efficient. Linear representation is suited for describing program flows and sequential operations, commonly used in optimizing control flows and state
machines.
— Graph-based encoding is flexible and powerful, capable of handling complex relationships
and structures. Graph-based encoding excels in circuit design and signal processing, effectively representing complex dependencies and shared sub-expressions.
— Grammar-based encoding generates solutions that conform to grammatical rules, making it
suitable for representing complex models with constraints, often used in program synthesis
and natural language processing tasks.
As the complexity of the problem increases, traditional encoding methods may struggle to handle more complex tasks. Therefore, more flexible and efficient encoding schemes can be designed
to meet the diverse needs of different problems. Moreover, existing encoding methods may suffer
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:9
Fig. 6. Examples of four GP chromosome representations. “ADF” indicts Automatically Defined Functions
based on tree. “LGP” indicts Linear Genetic Programming. “CGP” indicts Cartesian Genetic Programming.
“GGP” indicts Cartesian Genetic Programming.
Fig. 7. A general process of GP.
from redundancy, leading to duplicate individuals in the search space and reducing population
diversity. ADF help alleviate this issue by allowing reusable subcomponents, but research on ADF
is still limited. Future work can focus on the design, optimization, and integration of ADF with
other algorithms to further enhance the efficiency and scalability of GP.
4.1.2 Enhanced Evolution. GP is an evolutionary computation algorithm inspired by natural
selection and genetics, as shown in Figure 7. It mimics evolutionary processes to iteratively refine randomly generated programs into solutions tailored to specific problems through selection,
crossover, and mutation [172].
Feature analysis plays a vital role in enhancing GP model performance and computational efficiency. Researchers have developed various optimization methods, such as Al-Helali et al.’s genetic
planning with feature importance thresholds [3] and Chen et al.’s two-stage feature selection strategy combining significant candidates with feature permutation [32, 36]. Moreover, dimensionality
reduction techniques are also employed to address SR problems[239].
The optimization of genetic operators mainly involves crossover, mutation, and selection. Semantic crossover has emerged as a promising direction, as it mitigates the risk of disrupting semantic coherence by preserving meaningful gene combinations and aligning offspring with problem
structures[125, 199]. Efficient mutation operators further enhance GP’s search space exploration
capability. For example, Al-Helali et al. prioritize mutation of poorly constructed trees to increase
diversity [2], Virgolin and Bosman introduced coefficient mutation to optimize SR coefficients
[207], and Kushida et al. proposed module mutation for both discontinuous and smooth functions
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:10 J. Dong and J. Zhong
[115]. Recently, Lexicase Selection has garnered significant attention by evaluating individuals
across multiple test cases to handle multidimensional fitness, thereby enhancing diversity and
adaptability. Subsequent improvements include weighting test cases by importance [56], epsilonlexicase selection [119], and feature-based probabilistic methods [57]. Finally, adaptive operators
are an essential tool that dynamically adjusts evolutionary operations to balance global exploration
and local exploitation. For example, a dual-tree adaptive mutation mechanism using probability
vectors has been proposed [224].
4.1.3 Fitness Evaluation. (1) Accuracy evaluation. In the innovations of fitness evaluation, accuracy evaluation extends beyond commonly used regression metrics (i.e., RMSE, MSE, R2). Since
error metrics such as MSE, RMSE, and NMSE have simple mathematical relationships and their
variations are monotonic, these metrics may yield identical rankings when comparing the performance of individuals. This could potentially impact the selection process and the effectiveness
of evolution. To address this issue, some researchers incorporate constraint conditions on top of
accuracy requirements to address more complex environments. For example, Kubalik et al. [113]
considered both training accuracy and adherence to prior knowledge about desired model properties during the optimization process. Haider et al. [74] extended multi-objective algorithms with
shape constraints, employing a soft penalty approach to minimize constraint violations and prediction errors during the model training process. Furthermore, some researchers have developed
population diversity as a metric to help GP achieve a good balance between exploration and exploitation [25, 35].
(2) Balancing Accuracy and Interpretability. As black-box models like deep learning
become more prevalent, the focus on interpretability, especially in GP, has grown. By incorporating interpretability into fitness evaluation, GP enhances both accuracy and transparency in
its learning process. However, achieving the right balance between interpretability and accuracy
remains a key challenge. One effective enhancement is integrating regularization constraints
into the fitness function. For example, Vanneschi and Castellia [203] introduced soft-target
regularization to assess functional complexity, mitigating overfitting. Ni and Rockett [161] applied Tikhonov regularization, measuring semantic complexity, to multi-objective GP, improving
performance. Additionally, Montaña et al. [150] proposed a regularized fitness function based
on Vapnik Chervonenkis dimension upper bounds, aiding GP in addressing noisy SR problems.
Another type of multi-objective evaluation mechanism involves multiple objective functions
such as goodness of fit, model complexity, and interpretability, rather than focusing on a single
objective. Kommenda et al. [98] used predictive accuracy and complexity of the model as fitness
functions for multi-objective optimization. Furthermore, Rafiq et al. [174] incorporated hierarchy
in optimization, initially using a single-objective fitness function and introducing complexity as
a new objective under specific conditions before transitioning to multi-objective training.
(3) Implicit function evaluation. Implicit function evaluation does not directly provide a
clear fitness value but rather measures the model’s effectiveness through implicit relationships
or conditions. The classical evaluation method involves computing partial derivatives of a potential implicit equation and utilizing the average logarithmic error of these derivatives for fitness
assessment [184]. The specific computational formula is as follows:
− 1
N

N
i=1
loд 
1 + |
Δxi
Δyi
− ∂xi
∂yi
|

, (5)
where N is the number of observed data, Δx
Δy is an implicit derivative estimated from the data,
and ∂x
∂y is the implicit derivative derived from the candidate implicit function. Subsequently, Pan
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:11
et al. [166] improved the DB-FEM by introducing hyper-parameters to the constraint term of the
derivative, thus shifting the derivative away from the constant of zero. Furthermore, Chen et al.
[37] proposed a novel method called Comprehensive Learning Fitness Evaluation Mechanism (CL-FEM) for evaluating relationships in implicit functions. Unlike derivative evaluation
mechanisms, CL-FEM can learn from interference information in stochastic datasets S to validate
implicit equations, thereby reducing complexity and addressing sparse data problems. The specific
evaluation formula is shown below:
V =

MSE, if 
m1 > 10−4 ∧ m2 > 10−4 ∧···∧ mk > 10−4
= T RU E
1010, otherwise , (6)
where
mk = 1
N

N
i=1
	
Si − Sk
i

2
, k = 1, 2,...,D. (7)
If mk > 10−4, it indicates that the candidate model is meaningful in the kth dimension. The MSE
is computed as the fitness value for the candidate model only when all mk are greater than 10−4;
otherwise, it is assigned an infinite value. For a detailed description of the algorithm, please refer
to the [238]. Moreover, Wen et al. [211] proposed a new evaluation mechanism by applying the
Bolzano theorem to approximate the solutions of implicit equations, achieving promising results.
Evaluating implicit functions is more challenging than explicit ones, making the development
of effective fitness evaluation methods for implicit functions a promising research direction.
4.2 Information-driven Strategies
4.2.1 Semantic-based Approaches. In recent years, integrating semantic information into GP
has gained attention, focusing on aspects such as population initialization, genetic operators, and
defining new ones. These methods aim at accelerating convergence, maintain semantic diversity,
study semantic locality, and expand semantic-related features.
Indirect SGP utilizes semantic knowledge to guide the GP search, aiming at accelerating convergence and reduce the search space. It leverages semantic information in three ways [204]: ensuring
semantic behavioral diversity to enhance population diversity [17, 159], guiding the search toward
adjacent semantic regions of the best individual for smoother convergence [171, 199], and applying
geometric information in crossover operations to improve algorithm performance [104, 105].
Direct SGP involves defining specific semantic operators or mutation operators designed to enhance the search efficiency in GP. These operators leverage the semantic information of symbols
to guide the evolutionary direction of programming. For instance, Jeong et al. [80] introduced
a semantic clustering operator to improve GP convergence, while Huang et al. [77] designed a
linear chromosome representation and semantic genetic operators to propagate semantic errors
in programs. Noteworthy work includes Geometric Semantic Genetic Programming (GSGP)
[151], which directly searches the semantic space of functions using semantic-aware crossover
and mutation operators to improve search efficiency. Pawlak showed that GSGP programs are
random linear combinations of partial solutions and can be constructed more simply within a set
timeframe, guaranteeing optimal solutions to inductive problems [168]. However, GSGP focuses
on accuracy fitting rather than symbolic fitting, often resulting in significant tree bloat. The subsequent development of various methods has aimed at improving GSGP, with some focusing on
accelerating the convergence process [162], others on controlling the size of offspring [139, 205],
and still others on enhancing generalization performance [30, 33].
Semantic-based GPs face challenges such as high computational complexity and over-reliance
on semantic information. To tackle these challenges, approaches such as integrating multi-level
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:12 J. Dong and J. Zhong
semantics, varying mutation operations, and enhancing computational efficiency can be
explored.
4.2.2 Knowledge-driven Approaches. Knowledge-driven SR utilizes domain-specific knowledge
or prior information to guide modeling and prediction. Common approaches in GP include initializing the population with prior knowledge to speed up convergence [167], adjusting the fitness
function to favor solutions aligned with this knowledge, and modifying the search direction to
find specific solutions [92, 133]. Furthermore, constraints based on prior knowledge can be introduced to ensure solutions comply with known problem features, such as guiding model training
with formal constraints like monotonicity and symmetry [112], or constraining function values
and derivatives [108]. Apart from that, transfer learning has also been employed to improve GP
search efficiency, with frameworks like Chen et al.’s [34] transfer learning approach using differential evolution to optimize weights and accelerate the search, and zhong et al.’s [234] knowledge
transfer mechanism for multi-form GP. Moreover, Munoz et al. [154] demonstrated that out-ofdomain knowledge can help GP solve real-world problems across domains, and Al-Helali et al.
[2] introduced multi-tree GP for transfer learning, improving missing value estimation. Additionally, surrogate models have been employed to aid the search process, enhancing the efficiency of
handling SR tasks [88, 222]. Not only these, several studies have also integrated subject-specific
domain knowledge into the SR search process [69, 191].
Knowledge-driven GP improves search efficiency and solution quality but faces challenges like
reliance on high-quality domain knowledge, integration complexity, and reduced diversity. Future
advancements could focus on automated knowledge acquisition, dynamic updates, and integrating
diverse knowledge sources (e.g., semantics, statistics, physical constraints) to enhance robustness
and applicability.
4.3 Emerging Research Directions
4.3.1 Interpretability Improvement. Interpretability is key for understanding model behavior,
explaining decisions, and building trust. Unlike black-box models like NNs, GPs are inherently
interpretable. Mei et al. [147] review research on interpretable AI using GP, focusing on intrinsic
and post-hoc interpretability. However, complex symbolic structures in many GP models still hinder comprehension. To improve this, strategies like structural simplification, feature importance
analysis, and visualization tools have been explored.
Simplifying the generated structure is a key approach to enhancing interpretability in GP. This
involves applying heuristic rules or structural constraints to produce concise and comprehensible
symbolic representations. Common strategies include limiting tree depth [206], employing bloat
control operators [49], and pruning redundant components [27]. Additionally, replacing complex
tree structures with simpler, semantically meaningful alternatives has gained attention [39]. Noman et al. [79] provide a comprehensive overview of these simplification techniques.
Feature importance analysis enhances interpretability by evaluating each feature’s impact on
the model’s output through monitoring usage, analyzing coefficients, and assessing program structures. For example, Aldeia et al. [5] used partial effects to estimate factor importance in the ITEA
algorithm, aligning with ground-truth explanations. Miranda et al. [148] applied local linear regression to analyze input attribute impacts, while Dick et al. [55] normalized features to ensure
equal contributions to predictions.
To further enhance interpretability and generalizability, researchers have also tackled the issue
of dimensional consistency in solutions. Ensuring consistent units of measurement prevents interpretational conflicts and improves practical applicability. Montana [149] introduced Strongly
Typed GP (STGP), which enforces unit consistency across all solutions. Keijzer and Babovic [90]
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:13
extended this idea with an enhanced GP approach, balancing unit consistency with challenges
such as reduced accuracy and increased complexity.
Visualization techniques enhance interpretability by presenting solutions in intuitive formats.
These methods convert symbolic structures into graphical representations, simplifying the observation of algorithmic processes and outcomes. For example, Medvet et al. [146] used diversity and
DU graphs to visualize population diversity and gene contributions, while Nguyen et al. [160]
applied dimensionality reduction for analyzing GP performance. Lensen et al. [126] introduced
GPtSNE, a method that evolves interpretable dataset mappings into high-quality visualizations for
better understanding of GP outputs.
4.3.2 Parallel and Distributed. GP is computationally intensive, especially for complex and
large-scale SR problems, often resulting in slow operation. To address this, researchers have
developed distributed and parallel computing approaches to improve efficiency. Distributed GP
distributes tasks across multiple nodes, focusing on population distribution, where individuals are
allocated to different processors, as demonstrated by Fernández et al.[67] with multi-population
parallel GP, and Huang et al. [78] with a hierarchical parallel computing framework. It also
includes dimension distribution, where problem dimensions are assigned to computing nodes,
such as in Klein et al.’s AJAX-based system for distributed fitness evaluations [97], and Dong
et al.’s federated GP framework for secure distributed SR [59]. Parallel GP, on the other hand,
accelerates GP by handling tasks concurrently, primarily focusing on parallelizing fitness evaluations. Zhang et al. [230] utilized GPU parallelism with a CUDA-based SR algorithm, Augusto
et al. [12] leveraged OpenCL for evaluation speedup, and Burlacu et al. [24] proposed the Operon
C++ framework for task-level parallelism. Additionally, Zeng et al. [226] evaluated parallel
GP scalability and runtime performance, while Sambo et al. [180] introduced Asynchronous
Parallel GP (APGP) to reduce complexity during evolution.
In summary, distributed GP distributes computational tasks across nodes for global optimization,
while parallel GP enhances local computational efficiency by executing tasks concurrently within a
single node. Future work could focus on developing a universal, easy-to-use, and high-performance
open-source GP platform.
4.4 Summary
Table 3 summarizes the GP methods discussed in this article along with their code. As a classical
SR approach, GP has shown strong accuracy and wide applicability across domains. Its diverse
chromosome representations provide rich expressiveness and adaptability, enabling the flexible
construction of complex models for various regression tasks. Unlike black-box models, GP offers
high interpretability by clearly revealing the solution structure and underlying logic, making it
well-suited for tasks requiring model transparency. Despite these strengths, GP has several limitations. Its large search space can lead to overfitting, particularly with limited or noisy data. Performance is also sensitive to hyperparameter settings, with improper choices potentially causing
instability or long training times. While effective on low-dimensional problems, GP struggles with
high-dimensional data due to increased computational complexity, feature redundancy, and the
curse of dimensionality. Additionally, GP may get trapped in local optima, affecting final model
quality. To maximize its effectiveness, especially in high-dimensional settings, it is important to
fine-tune hyperparameters and apply techniques like feature selection or dimensionality reduction
to control complexity and improve performance.
5 NN-based Methods
In the past several years, using NNs to address SR problems has become a growing trend. These approaches include deep reinforcement learning (DRL), transformers, equation learners (EQL),
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:14 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Table 3. GP Methods For SR
Method Description Year Code
Basic Elements
GE [164] Grammatical Evolution, Backus-Naur Form 2001 App. 10
SL-GEP [237] Tree representation, ADF 2016 App. 10
Ve-GP [15] Vector-based representation 2019 – –
GB-LGP [15] Linear GP, Stochastic Context-Free Grammar 2017 – –
MLSI [76] Linear representation, Directed acyclic graph 2023 App. 10
DLS_GP [227] Double-Stage Lexicase Selection Operator 2023 App. 10
GGPES [152] Hybrid Technique, Grammar GP, Evolution Strategy 2018 – –
PLS [57] ϵ-plexicase selection 2023 App. 10
Ref [107] Grammatical evolution, Population diversity 2020 – –
Ref [7] Grammar Pruning, Effective Genome Length 2021 – –
Ref [36] Feature Selection, High-Dimensional SR 2017 – –
Ref [3] Feature Removal Impact, High-Dimensional SR 2024 – –
MTGP [4] Multitree GP, Incomplete Data 2023 – –
Information-Driven Strategies
MSGP [125] Memetic Semantic 2023 App. 10
GSGP [151] Semantic Geometric Operators, Semantic Fitness Landscapes 2012 App. 10
GPALGX [31] Angle-aware Mating Scheme 2017 – –
ADGSGP [33] Angle-Awareness, Geometric Semantic Operator 2018 – –
GSGP-Red [139] Solution Size, Function Simplification 2018 App. 10
SBP-GP [205] Semantic Back-Propagation utilized in GP 2019 App. 10
SLGP [77] New Chromosome Representation, Mutate-and-divide Propagation 2024 App. 10
GP/TS-S [40] Tournament Selection,Statistical Test 2018 App. 10
pMTGPDA [2] Transfer Learning, Domain Knowledge 2021 – –
Ref [112] Prior Knowledge, Multi-Objective SR 2020 – –
Ref [108] Prior Knowledge, Shape-Constrained SR 2022 – –
SciMED [92] Domain Knowledge, Physics-Informed SR 2022 App. 10
Emerging Research Directions
ELA [148] Post-Hoc Interpretability 2020 App. 10
PE-ITEA [5] Feature Importance, ITEA 2021 – –
DU map [146] Diversity and Usage map, Visualization 2018 App. 10
APGP [180] Asynchronous Parallel Computing 2021 – –
GPOCL [12] OpenCL, GP-GPU 2013 – –
Ref [226] Platforms Comparison, MPI, GPU, Spark 2020 – –
HSL-GEP [78] Adaptive-weight, Multi-population, GPU 2020 – –
“MLSI” indicts Multitask LGP with Shared Individuals. “PLS” indicts Probabilistic Lexicase Selection. “ELA” indicts
Explanation by Local Approximation. “ITEA” indicts Interaction-Transformation Evolutionary Algorithm. “PE-ITEA”
indicts ITEA coupled with Partial Effect. “APGP” indicts asynchronous parallel GP. “HSL-GEP” indicts
high-performance self-learning gene expression programming algorithm. “GB-LGP” indicts Grammar-Based LGP.
“GPALGX” indicts GP implements the angle-awareness into one recent approximate geometric crossover.
hybrid methods that integrate NN with GP (Neuro-GP integration), and other NN models such as
the increasingly popular Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs).
5.1 Deep Reinforcement Learning
DRL approximates mathematical expressions by learning complex strategies and action sequences.
The key of deep reinforcement learning lies in the agent learning the optimal strategy through interaction with the environment, as shown in Figure 8. State (S) represents the observed data point
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:15
Fig. 8. A sample sketch of a general SR method based on DRL.
and the current tree structure; Action (A) corresponds to an expression that combines operators
(e.g., +, -, *, /) or operands (i.e., variables, constants). Reward (R) evaluates the fit of the expression
to the target function (i.e., MSE, R2). Q-value function (Q(S,A)) predicts the expected cumulative
reward for taking action A in state S as following:
Q(S,A) = E

R(S,A) +γ max A Q(S
,A
)

, (8)
where E is the expected value. γ is a discount factor that weighs the importance of a present reward
against a future reward. S is the new state after action A is performed.
In DRL methods, a noteworthy work is Deep Symbolic Regression (DSR)[170], which
employs a novel risk-seeking policy gradient algorithm for training. In this approach, sampling
tokens correspond to actions, while parent and sibling inputs act as observations, and the
reward function is based on NRMSE. However, this method does not allow free parameters
in the generated expressions, which significantly limits its functionality. To address this issue,
Landajuela et al. proposed uDSR [122].
Building on the uDSR framework, some researchers have introduced physical constraints to
restrict the freedom of the equation generator further, thereby enhancing performance [192]. Recently, Guo et al. [73] proposed an efficient gradient-based learning method called Efficient Symbolic Policy Learning (ESPL), which learns symbolic policies from scratch in an end-to-end differentiable manner. Some studies have also introduced grammatical knowledge to enhance search
capabilities by guiding the search process. For example, Crochepierre et al. [47] proposed the
Reinforcement-Based Grammar-Guided Symbolic Regression (RBG2-SR) method, which
uses context-free grammar as the action space in reinforcement learning to constrain the representation space with domain knowledge. Building on this idea, they also developed an interactive
platform [46] that generates expressions based on human preferences. Similarly, another notable
advancement is a real-time search demonstration system for DSR, which enables users to interactively guide the search process by dynamically adjusting hyperparameters and manually selecting
expressions during training [94].
Additionally, combining RL with GP is another promising direction. Zhang et al. [228] combined
GEP and multi-agent RL for SR. They defined the state as a constant value and designed different
action spaces: functional primitives for the head of the symbolic expression and terminal primitives for the tail. The reward was set to MSE. Mundhenk et al. [153] proposed a neural-guided
component where RNNs generate samples for initial populations in GP. The GP-optimized samples are then combined with the initial populations of RNNs, allowing RNNs to gradually learn
better starting populations.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:16 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Fig. 9. An example of solving SR with transformer. Input represents data where D is the dimension of variables x and N is the observation size. The embedder encodes tokens into vectors with semantic or structural
meaning. The encoder captures variable relationships and expression hierarchy, including priorities. The decoder generates symbolic expressions step-by-step, ensuring mathematical validity.
5.2 Transformers
The pre-trained transformer models have demonstrated significant potential in SR. Figure 9 is
shown an example of solving SR with transformer.
Transformer models represent expressions as sequences [19, 121]. Unlike RL-based methods,
they leverage large-scale pre-training to improve efficiency and inference speed [201]. These models construct expression frameworks [20] while simultaneously optimizing structures and coefficients [62]. For instance, Biggio et al. [20] utilized beam search and sampling methods as decoding
strategies, generating multiple candidate equations from a given dataset. The best candidate is
then selected based on fitting accuracy, with constants refined using the BFGS optimization algorithm. Similarly, Holt et al. [75] proposed the DGSR framework, which employs pre-trained deep
generative models to capture the inherent patterns in equations, thereby improving optimization
efficiency. However, the absence of a search mechanism in the DGSR model limits its ability to
make targeted improvements for specific problems. To address this, Kamienny et al. [83] introduced Monte Carlo search, effectively mitigating this limitation.
In addition, from the computer vision perspective, Xing et al. [220] propose a DeSTrOI framework that aims at predicting the importance of each mathematical operator in order to reduce the
search space for SR tasks. Li et al. [128] proposed to convert datasets into images and then generate
expressions from the images.
The latest research trend is to integrate knowledge into the search process of transformer. Li
et al. [130] used supervised contrastive learning to align features of expressions with the same
skeleton. TPSR [187] incorporated non-differentiable feedback as external knowledge to improve
extrapolation and noise robustness. Biggio et al. [21] injected prior knowledge to bias predictions
toward structurally valid expressions, narrowing the search space. Additionally, transformer-based
SR has been extended to dynamical systems, enabling the discovery of arbitrary nonlinear ODEs
from multidimensional data without prior assumptions [51].
5.3 Equation Learners
EQL [140] employ specialized NN architectures to automatically discover mathematical expressions. By using symbolic operations from SR as activation functions and training with sparse constraints through backpropagation and gradient descent, EQL achieves interpretable results. This
unique design transforms NN regression into a transparent and explainable process, as illustrated
in Figure 10.
Unlike traditional NNs, the EQL network uses a set of primitive functions as activation functions.
These activation functions are primitive operators that the final expression may include unary
operators (e.g., cos, sin, ln) and binary operators (e.g., +, −, ×, ÷). The i
th layer values can be
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:17
Fig. 10. An example of an EQL network architecture.
described as
zi = W i
hi−1 + bi
, (9)
hi = f (zi
), (10)
where h0 is the input data, W i is the weight matrix of the i layer, bi is the bias of the i layer.
f ∈{id,sin,cos,siдm, ×} represents function operators. zi represents intermediate representation
of the i layer. There are several approaches proposed in the literature to enhance EQL. These enhancements can be categorized into three paradigms: optimizing the network architecture, refining
the learning algorithms, and introducing new regularization techniques.
In [179], an extended network architecture named EQL÷ was introduced. EQL÷ includes a division unit in its final layer, enabling it to model division within network structures. This adaptation
is particularly suited for physical systems. Costa et al. enhanced EQL with OccamNet, a fast neural
model for SR, described in [42]. OccamNet uses NNs to simulate function probability distributions,
employs hopping connections for compact solutions, and optimizes via a new two-step gradient
descent and evolutionary strategy training. Zhou and Pan proposed MathONet in [240], combining
Polynomial-Network (PolyNet) and Operation-Network (OperNet) using Bayesian methods
to find sparse subgraphs of NNs for solving ordinary and partial differential equations. Wu et al.
introduced DeepSymNet in [219], simplifying the SR problem into two sub-problems. Dong et al.
[60] proposed the evolving Equation Learner (eEQL), which introduces a unique network architecture based on ADFs. This novel design allows for dynamic adaptations of the network structure.
Finally, [229] extends EQL with SEQL and PEQL networks, demonstrating strong generalization
across analytical equations, partial differential equations, and high-dimensional datasets.
Moreover, several advancements have been pursued to improve the learning algorithms of EQL.
Werner et al. [212] introduced informed EQL (iEQL), integrating expert knowledge of equation
components and domain-specific sparse priors to produce interpretable models with strong predictive performance. Chen [29] proposed Gumbel-Max equation learner (GMEQL), employing a
continuous relaxation approach and trainable structural and regression parameters. Kubal’ık et al.
[114] presented N4SR, enhancing EQL with skip connections and adaptive optimization strategies
for managing training, regularization, and constraint errors. Wu et al. [218] developed a greedy
pruning algorithm for Equation Learners, preserving data fitting accuracy by selectively pruning
the network and employing beam search for optimal solutions.
Apart from that, Kim et al. [95] improved EQL using L0.5 sparse regularization and recommended
multiple NN for kinematic SR, each trained on specific time slots. It has been reported outperform
EQL on MNIST and dynamical systems.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:18 J. Dong and J. Zhong
5.4 Neuro-GP Integration
The combination of GP and NN leverages the strengths of both, providing more powerful solutions.
For instance, the expressions generated by GP can be used as input for NN, or the output of the
NN can be used as the optimization objective for GP [153, 236]. This combination can enhance the
robustness and efficiency of the search, accelerate the convergence speed of the model, and enable
the search to more effectively explore and utilize the structure and features of the problem. Further, some studies have explored using expressions generated by GP as activation functions for NN,
optimizing them to enhance model performance [60]. Another work proposed a neural-encoded
expression programming framework, consisting of an encoder and decoder, used to evaluate the
fitness values of the evolutionary algorithm. The encoder determines the positions of symbols,
while the decoder decodes strings into GEP expressions[9]. Furthermore, Razavi et al. [176] introduced a new GP framework called functional algebraic genetic programming (faiGP). This
approach uses a variational autoencoder with two convolutional layers (ConVAE) for dimensionality reduction and a Bayesian classifier to generate a prior distribution of operators and operands.
This method solves the problem of GP code bloat effectively. Another way of combining the two
is to replace GP’s genetic operators with NN. Wittenberg et al. [216] used denoising autoencoder long short-term memory networks (DAE-LSTMs) as a probabilistic model to replace
the standard recombination and mutation operators of GP.
5.5 Other NN Models
Beyond the specific SR methods discussed, researchers have integrated NNs with constraint rules
to tackle SR problems. For example, Udrescu and Tegmark [196] decomposed complex SR tasks
into simpler subproblems by using NNs to identify properties like multiplicative separability and
shift symmetry, followed by symbolic search. Similarly, Cranmer et al. [45] proposed fitting symbolic components of a trained graph neural network (GNN) independently, leveraging strong
inductive biases, and combining subexpressions to derive the final algebraic formula.
Additionally, some approaches leverage the knowledge acquired by NNs, such as storing learned
information in memory to guide the search process, enhancing the adaptability of the model to
new tasks [53]. Further, Kusner et al. [116] developed a grammar variable autoencoder that can
generate parse trees representing discrete objects using context-free syntax. Not only that, there
are efforts to explicitly combine assumptions about the underlying true expression structure to
perform SR, allowing the model to more specifically control the predicted expression structure
[58, 129]. For example, Bendinelli et al. [18] proposed NSRwH, a NN-SR method that integrates
structural assumptions into predictions, improving accuracy and enabling control over expression
structure.
Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs)[132] have recently gained attention for their interpretability and structured approach to approximating multivariate functions. KANs replace fixed
activation functions with learnable spline functions, eliminating reliance on linear weight matrices and enhancing adaptability to high-dimensional data. Many studies have enhanced KANs
by improving spline flexibility for better function approximation [221] and adding regularization
methods to boost generalization [61].
5.6 Summary
Table 4 provides a brief overview of representative NN-based methods and includes code links
for further exploration. While DRL and Transformer models can significantly improve learning
efficiency, their strong dependence on training data features often limits generalization, making
them less adaptable to unseen data. EQL offers some interpretability through symbolic operations,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:19
Table 4. NN-Based Methods For SR
Method Description Year Code
Deep Reinforcement Learning
DSR [170] Risk-Seeking Policy Gradient 2019 App. 10
NGPPS [153] RL,GP 2021 App. 10
RBG2-SR [47] Domain-knowledge, Grammar guided 2022 App. 10
IRL-SR [46] Human-Preference Feedback 2022 App. 10
Φ-SO [192] Physical Symbolic Optimization, Units Constraints 2023 App. 10
Sym-Q [194] Q-network, Offline RL 2024 App. 10
Transformer
Sy-Mathematics [121] Three Approaches To Generate Functions 2019 App. 10
SymbolicGPT [201] Large Scale Pre-training 2021 App. 10
NeSymReS [20] Language Model 2021 App. 10
E2E [82] Symbolic-Numeric Vocabulary 2022 App. 10
JSL-SR [130] Joint Supervised Learning 2023 App. 10
ODEforme [51] Dynamical Systems, Ordinary Differential Equation 2023 App. 10
DGSR [75] Pre-Trained Deep Generative 2024 App. 10
TPSR [187] Monte Carlo Tree Search, Non-differentiable feedback 2023 App. 10
EQL
EQL [140] Equation Learner 2016 App. 10
EQL÷ [179] Equation Learner Division 2018 App. 10
IEQL [95] Deep Learning Architectures 2020 App. 10
GMEQL [29] Gumbel-Max Trick 2020 App. 10
FEQL [131] Density Functional Theory 2020 App. 10
OccamNet [42] Skip Connections, Evolutionary Strategy 2020 App. 10
MathONet [240] DenseNet-Like Hierarchical Structure 2022 App. 10
Parametric-EQL [229] CNN, Parametric Equations 2023 App. 10
DeepSymNet [219] Two Smaller Subproblems 2023 App. 10
PruneSymNet [218] Greedy Pruning, Beam Search 2024 App. 10
SymbolNet [195] End-to-end single-phase Dynamic Pruning 2024 App. 10
Others
GrammarVAE [116] Grammar Variational Autoencoder 2017 App. 10
GNSR [45] Particle Systems and Graph Networks 2020 App. 10
AI-Feynman [196] NN Fitting With Physics-Inspired Techniques 2020 App. 10
EQDiscovery [38] Physics Embedding, Sparse Regression 2021 App. 10
NSRwH [18] User-Defined Prior Knowledge or Hypotheses 2023 App. 10
SISR [58] Multi-Layer LSTM-RNN 2023 App. 10
KAN [132] Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem 2024 App. 10
“NGPPS” indicts Neural-guided genetic programming population seeding; “RBG2-SR” indicts Reinforcement Based
Grammar Guided Symbolic Regression; “IRL-SR” indicts Interactive Reinforcement Learning for Symbolic Regression;
“Φ-SO” indicts Physical Symbolic Optimization; “Sym-Q” indicts Symbolic Qnetwork; “NeSymReS” indicts Neural
Symbolic Regression That Scales; “E2E” indicts End-to-End; “TPSR” indicts Transformer-based Planning for Symbolic
Regression; “NSRwH” indicts Neural Symbolic Regression with Hypotheses;“SISR” indicts Symplectically Integrated
Symbolic Regression;
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:20 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Table 5. State-of-the-art SR Methods
Name Description Year code
Operon [24] C++ coded GP, fine-tuning by Levenberg-Marquardt 2020 App. 10
SBP-GP [205] Semantic back-propagation genetic programming 2019 App. 10
uDSR [122] Neural-guided search, large-scale pre-training, 2022 App. 10
Bingo [175] Acyclic graphs, Linear representation, coefficient tuning 2022 App. 10
E2ET [82] Pre-trained transformer, fine-tuned 2022 App. 10
RILS-ROLS [87] Local search and ordinary least squares 2023 App. 10
MRGP [10] Multiple Regression GP 2014 App. 10
GP-GOMEA [206] Gene-pool OptimalMixing 2021 App. 10
FEAT [118] Feature Engineering Automation Tool 2019 App. 10
AIFeynman [196] Physics-inspired SR 2020 App. 10
yet most NN approaches still suffer from the “black-box” nature, hindering their applicability in
scenarios requiring transparency. Moreover, models like Transformers and DRL typically demand
considerable computational resources and time, especially with high-dimensional data. Although
they improve accuracy and efficiency, the computational cost remains a challenge for large-scale
or complex tasks. Future research may focus on three key areas: enhancing generalization, improving interpretability, and reducing computational complexity. Generalization can be improved
through adaptive regularization techniques (e.g., dropout, early stopping) and increased data
diversity. Interpretability may benefit from integrating SR-generated symbolic expressions into
the learning process. To reduce computational costs, optimizing NN architectures and training
strategies such as pruning or knowledge distillation can help maintain performance while
lowering resource demands.
6 State-of-the-art
Current SR algorithms exhibit varying performance and characteristics across different tasks. To
systematically evaluate their practical effectiveness, we conducted a comprehensive review based
on multiple SRBench benchmarks. We selected 10 representative algorithms with strong performance and promising potential, using criteria such as fitting accuracy, extrapolation ability, and
formula simplicity. Table 5 summarizes key information about these algorithms, including their
original publications, implementation availability, and main features. This provides researchers
with a clear overview of the SR landscape and supports practitioners in selecting appropriate methods for specific applications.
Operon [24] is a high-performance SR framework combining evolutionary algorithms with efficient representations and optimization techniques. It emphasizes scalability and includes features
like hybrid optimization, specialized mutation operators, and multi-threaded execution, making it
ideal for large-scale, complex datasets. SBP-GP [205] enhances GP by incorporating semantic backpropagation, using fitness gradient information to guide evolutionary operations. This improves
convergence speed and reduces premature convergence by ensuring semantically meaningful solutions. uDSR [122] uses deep reinforcement learning to search for symbolic expressions, employing NN to handle high-dimensional datasets effectively. By integrating domain-specific knowledge,
uDSR achieves high accuracy and efficiency. Bingo [175] is a Python-based SR library focusing
on flexibility and extensibility. It uses evolutionary algorithms with explicit control over function
sets and constraints, making it effective for customized symbolic models. RILS-ROLS [87] combines iterative local search with regularized least squares fitting to optimize symbolic expressions.
It balances global exploration and local refinement, excelling in problems with complex search
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:21
spaces. E2ET [82] uses deep learning for end-to-end SR, excelling in modeling highly complex
functions, particularly with large datasets and high-dimensional problems. MRGP [10] combines
multiple representation forms to enhance adaptability, ideal for tasks requiring flexible problem
representation and optimization. GP-GOMEA [206] improves evolutionary processes with efficient gene-pool mixing, excelling in large-scale and computationally intensive tasks. FEAT [118]
integrates SR with feature engineering to create interpretable models, especially useful in finance
and healthcare. AI Feynman [196] uncovers physical formulas from data, making it particularly
suited for scientific research in physics and engineering.
7 Applications Of SR
Over recent years, there has been growing interest among researchers in interpretable models,
leading to significant traction for SR. It’s noteworthy that the application scope of SR is extensive
and rapidly expanding. Therefore, it’s impractical to list all application scenarios in this article.
This section will focus on five key application areas of SR.
7.1 Model Interpretation
SR offers a robust approach to interpreting complex models by generating explicit mathematical
expressions that are human-readable and insightful. As a surrogate model, SR can approximate
the input-output relationships of NN, replacing their opaque structures with interpretable
formulas. For instance, Wetzel et al. [213] utilized SR to find equivalences between NN outputs and human-readable equations, providing an interpretable approximation of network
behavior. SR also excels in local interpretability by generating formulas that explain model
behavior in specific input regions, as Luo et al. [135] extracted semantic information from
NN layers. Furthermore, SR can reveal hidden feature interactions within models, like Cava
et al. [120] applied SR to high-dimensional electronic health record data, automating feature
engineering and producing concise, accurate models. Beyond feature interactions, SR generates
rule-based formulas that uncover embedded regularities, such as in the work of Zheng et al.
[232], where NN-based learning-to-optimize (L2O) predictors were converted into symbolic
representations with enhanced interpretability metrics. Nadizar et al. [155] utilized the generative
process of GP to guide user preferences in online training of artificial NN, thereby enhancing
interpretability.
7.2 Physical Modeling
Physical modeling is one of the most prevalent applications of SR, extensively used in dynamic
systems modeling, materials science, climate and environmental science, and astrophysics. SR can
derive equations describing various physical phenomena, such as motion, electromagnetic fields,
and thermodynamics. For example, Tenachi et al. [192] proposed a physical symbolic optimization
framework using deep reinforcement learning to recover analytical symbolic expressions from
physical data through unit constraint learning. Medina and White [145] introduced active learning
and physical constraints regularization into SR to enhance performance. Additionally, Angelisis
et al. [8] provided detailed application scenarios in the physical domain. Key studies, such as
Schmidt and Lipson’s [183] work on automatically generating physical laws, and Udrescu and
Tegmark’s AI Feynman method [197], which combines physical knowledge to improve complex
physical system modeling, highlight SR’s potential. Cranmer et al. [45] discussed integrating
deep learning with SR, while Sahoo et al. [179] explored SR’s application in extrapolation and
control. These studies demonstrate that SR, by generating interpretable mathematical models,
can significantly improve our understanding and prediction of complex physical systems’
behavior.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:22 J. Dong and J. Zhong
7.3 Materials Science
There are many potential areas in materials science where SR can be applied, primarily due to its
unique capability in modeling nonlinear systems. Nonlinear phenomena are ubiquitous in materials science, especially in the changes in material properties induced by variations in structure,
composition, and external disturbances [210]. For example, SR has been used to identify the relationship between the adsorption energy of the first zinc atom and the properties of dopant atoms
[86]. Additionally, the discovery of material models is a key area of research with broad academic
and technical significance. For instance, SR has been successfully applied to generate constitutive models for hyperelastic materials automatically [1]. In such contexts, dynamic multivariable
models are ideal as they can uncover the complex interdependencies between variables and provide data-driven guidance for optimizing material performance. Through SR models, researchers
can effectively identify the relationship between the microscopic properties and macroscopic performance of materials, thereby enabling quantitative predictions and improvements in material
design [48].
7.4 Engineering Design
SR has been widely used in engineering design, it can help engineers find and optimize the design
parameters of complex systems, to improve the design efficiency and effect. SR plays a crucial role
in the fields of structural optimization, control system design, material design, and circuit design.
For example, Kronberger et al. [110] applied SR to friction systems to determine optimal and safe
design parameters; Danai et al. [50] use SR in controller design to improve interpretability. In
addition, SR is also used to model and control robotic arms [231], as well as to model and control
manufacturing systems [26, 54]. Going one step further, SR provides a powerful tool for electronic
circuit design, not only to derive mathematical models of circuits but also to optimize circuit performance and analyze the effects of individual components [28, 182]. These studies show that SR
significantly improves the interpretability and optimization ability of engineering design models.
7.5 Knowledge Discovery
SR is a powerful tool for knowledge discovery, providing insights into complex relationships in
data by generating interpretable mathematical expressions that help researchers extract underlying patterns and relationships from complex data. For example, SR has been applied to simulate
the transmission spectra of exoplanets during transits, allowing researchers to gain insight into
the atmospheric structure and composition of these objects [141]. In the reference [106, 111], it describes how to use SR for knowledge discovery using the open source software HeuristicLab. The
SR can also be extracted into a crowd behavior rules to help in large crowd control place [127, 233].
These applications show that SR significantly facilitates the ability to extract knowledge from a
variety of data sets by generating insightful models.
8 Software Tools
With the increasing popularity of SR, there has been a notable surge in the development of software tools dedicated to applications such as data modeling, predictive analysis, and system understanding. This subsection aims at providing an overview and analysis of some tools, as detailed in
Table 6.
Cava et al. [117] developed SRBench, an open-source platform evaluating 14 SR and 7 machine
learning methods on 252 regression problems, including real-world datasets and benchmark problems like physical equations and ODE systems. It serves as a comprehensive tool for SR beginners.
Extended as SRBench++ [52], it provides detailed comparisons of 12 SR algorithms. Additionally,
Python packages like CP3-bench and Aldeia et al.’s [6] library for benchmarking interpretability
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:23
Table 6. Software Tools For SR
Tools Description Type Implementation
SRBench [117] Integrated platform GP,NN,DE Python,C++,C10
SRBench++ [52] Integrated platform GP,NN,DE Python,C++,Java10
CP3-bench [193] Integrated platform GP,NN,DE Python,C10
iirsBenchmark [6] Explanatory platform VTRM Python,jupyter10
GPLab [214] A GP toolbox for MATLAB GP Matlab10
GenProg [124] Automatic software repair GP C10
GPC++ Automatically defined functions GP C++10
ellenGP Stack-based, linear representation GP C++10
GPTIPS [186] Interactive modelling environment GP MATLAB10
PonyGE2 [66] Formal Grammars GE Python10
WebGE [41] Web-based graphical user interface GE Java10
Eureqa [183] User-friendly GUI GP C++10
QLattice [22] Quantum inspiration – Python10
Glyph [173] A lightweight framework GP Python10
DEAP [44] Evolutionary Computation Framework EC Python10
GPlearn [189] A Scikit-Learn compatible API GP Python10
PySR [44] Multi-population, Asynchronous GP Python, Julia10
HeuristicLab [63] Heuristic and evolutionary algorithms GP C #10
Data-Modeler [100] Evolved Analytics’ DataModeler GP –10
ALAMO [43] Machine learning software GP Python,C10
HyperGP Heterogeneous Parallel GP Python,C++,Cuda10
“GP” indicates genetic programming; “NN” indicates neural network; “DE” indicates deterministic methods; “GE”
indicates grammatical evolution; “VTRM”indicates various types of regression methods. The “Implementation" column
lists some commonly used languages; further details can be accessed through the link.
methods have further enriched SR benchmarking resources. GPLab [214] and GPTIPS [186] are
two software toolboxes designed based on MATLAB, facilitating the implementation of GP and
SR techniques. They support the exploration of complex mathematical relationships within data
through evolutionary algorithms. PonyGE2 [66] and WebGE [41] are two software tools based
on grammatical evolution (GE). PonyGE2 is a Python framework offering a flexible environment for evolutionary computation research, while WebGE is a web-based platform providing an
accessible interface for applying GE techniques through a browser. Eureqa [183] is a commercial
SR software that is user-friendly with a simple and intuitive graphical user interface (GUI). It
also allows operations through a command-line interface (CLI), providing users with flexibility
in their interactions with the software. QLattice [22] is an SR tool developed by Abzu and Aibrain.
QLattice supports users in setting up SR tasks through simple drag-and-drop and interactive
methods. It possesses adaptability, automatically selecting and adjusting models to better suit
various types of data. HeuristicLab [63] is an open-source software platform for modeling and
optimizing problems. HeuristicLab is a cross-platform software that can run on operating systems
such as Windows, Linux, and macOS. Data-Modeler [100] is a software tool for creating and
optimizing mathematical models based on collected data. Automated Learning and Modeling
Optimization (ALAMO) [43] is a machine learning software designed to construct accurate
and interpretable models using data collected from experiments or other black-box systems.
HyperGP is an open-source high performance framework, providing convenient distributed
heterogeneous acceleration for the custom prototyping of GP and its variants.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:24 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Furthermore, the implementation of SR can be accomplished through various tools and libraries,
with specific choices depending on the user’s needs, preferences, and use cases. In the Python
ecosystem, libraries such as DEAP [68], GPlearn [189], Glyph [173], PySR [44], and Pyevolve
[169] offer convenient functionalities for SR. Additionally, there are other toolkits like Evolutionary Computation in Java (ECJ) [185] that provide corresponding implementations on the Java
platform. These tools and libraries furnish the fundamental framework and algorithms for SR, allowing users to customize and extend them based on the specific characteristics of their problems.
9 Future Trends
9.1 Interpretable Models
SR has been the focus of extensive efforts to enhance interpretability from various perspectives,
including model transparency, usability, and simplicity. Some studies have also incorporated human preferences as prior knowledge to develop more interpretable SR models [155]. While these
approaches have made notable progress, future research may focus on: (1) further improving the
generalization ability of SR models to maintain interpretability on more complex tasks; and (2) enhancing usability by making the derivation process more intuitive and accessible, thereby lowering
cognitive and practical barriers for human users.
With the growing demand for interpretability in black-box models such as NNs, explaining
machine learning (ML) models has become a major focus in both academia and industry [72].
SR, which reveals underlying data relationships through explicit mathematical expressions, offers
unique advantages for enhancing interpretability. However, its use in explaining NNs remains relatively underexplored, leaving ample room for future research. Promising directions include: (1)
integrating SR with NN architectures to derive intuitive mathematical representations of network
behavior; (2) applying SR to large-scale, complex NNs to achieve a balance between model compression and interpretability.
9.2 SR Meets Deep Learning
To further harness the strengths of both deep learning and SR, future research may focus on embedding symbolic reasoning into deep learning frameworks. This includes integrating techniques
such as logical inference and rule-based reasoning into NNs, enabling them to preserve hierarchical symbolic structures and reasoning capabilities during learning. Such integration aims at
combining deep learning’s capacity for handling large-scale data with SR’s interpretability and
reasoning strengths. Conversely, deep learning can also enhance SR by assisting in data preprocessing, feature extraction, and refinement of the SR process itself. For instance, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can automatically extract
informative features that serve as inputs to SR, improving its understanding of complex data patterns. Furthermore, combining SR with large language models (LLMs)—which excel at capturing
intricate patterns and associations—holds promise for generating more accurate and reliable mathematical expressions, thereby advancing automated scientific discovery.
9.3 SR Meets AutoML
Embedding SR into the AutoML process brings comprehensive and flexible advantages. This approach not only automates the design of machine learning pipelines, including data preprocessing, feature engineering, and model selection but also enhances model performance by optimizing
model structure and searching the hyperparameter space. The flexibility of SR enables the AutoML system to adapt to various tasks and data types, providing users with customized solutions.
Furthermore, AutoML can be employed for feature engineering and model selection, facilitating
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:25
the automatic extraction of data features and the identification of the most suitable SR model to
enhance model performance and generalization capability. These AutoML algorithms proficiently
extract pertinent features from raw data and identify optimal model structures and parameter configurations using optimization algorithms. As a result, they minimize the requirement for manual
intervention and elevate the accuracy and efficiency of SR models.
9.4 SR Meets Multi-form Equations
SR faces challenges in modeling dynamic systems like ODEs, with time dependencies and nonlinear relationships. Future research could address these by incorporating time-series data, using
deep learning for nonlinear systems, and applying multi-scale modeling for dynamic features. SR
also struggles with implicit equations, which are difficult to express and require solving complex
systems, increasing computational complexity. Future work should focus on designing suitable
loss functions, improving interpretability, and combining deep learning with SR for better solution accuracy and efficiency.
9.5 Exploration of Multimodal SR
Multimodal SR is an emerging research trend that aims at handling diverse data types (e.g., images,
text, sound) and extract symbolic expressions for more comprehensive interpretation and prediction of complex phenomena. The focus is on integrating information from different modalities to
improve SR accuracy and robustness. However, multimodal SR faces several challenges, including
the complexity of data fusion, model design, and task definition. Effectively integrating information from different modalities, designing SR models suitable for multimodal data, and defining
clear task objectives are key issues that need to be addressed.
9.6 Open Source Platform
A key future direction in SR is the development of open-source universal platforms. While benchmarks like SRBench [117] and SRBench++ [52] are useful, they lack dataset diversity, particularly
in high-dimensional, noisy, or imbalanced scenarios. Evaluation metrics are also limited and may
not capture all performance differences. Future improvements could include expanding datasets,
introducing more complex problems (e.g., implicit functions), developing comprehensive metrics,
and creating dynamic benchmarking frameworks. Another key advancement will be the development of flexible, easy-to-use, and parallelizable open-source GP platforms.
10 Conclusions
With the development of explainable AI, various methods enhancing model interpretability have
been proposed in the research community. Compared to traditional black-box models, SR demonstrates significant competitiveness due to its capability to derive explicit and interpretable mathematical expressions. Therefore, SR has become a hot research topic.
In this survey, we first introduce the background information of SR to help readers better understand it. Secondly, an overview of the latest SR technologies is provided, mainly categorized into
three aspects: deterministic methods, GP-based methods, and NN-based methods. We then selected
and introduced ten advanced methods, providing links to their implementations. Subsequently, five
key applications are summarized to show the potential ability of SR to handle real-world problems.
We also summarize and list the commonly used toolkits and software.
Despite the rapid progress and development of SR, there are still many challenges and unresolved issues. Firstly, there is a need to further enhance the interpretability of models, including
improving the interpretability of SR models themselves and applying SR to interpret other models. Secondly, integrating SR with deep learning, and applying symbolic reasoning to deep learning
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:26 J. Dong and J. Zhong
models, is an important direction. Thirdly, exploring the combination of SR and automatic learning
is also a promising research direction. Fourthly, advancing multi-form symbolic structures for SR
and multimodel SR to address complex real-world problems is crucial. Lastly, creating open-source
universal platforms is critical for advancing the field.
References
[1] Rasul Abdusalamov, Markus Hillgärtner, and Mikhail Itskov. 2023. Hyperelastic material modelling using symbolic
regression. PAMM 22, 1 (2023), e202200263.
[2] Baligh Al-Helali, Qi Chen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2021. Multitree genetic programming with new operators
for transfer learning in symbolic regression with incomplete data. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation
25, 6 (2021), 1049–1063.
[3] Baligh Al-Helali, Qi Chen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2024. Genetic programming for feature selection based on
feature removal impact in high-dimensional symbolic regression. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 8, 3 (2024), 2269–2282.
[4] Baligh Al-Helali, Qi Chen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2024. Multitree genetic programming with featurebased transfer learning for symbolic regression on incomplete data. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 54, 7 (2024),
4041–4027.
[5] Guilherme Seidyo Imai Aldeia and Fabrício Olivetti de França. 2021. Measuring feature importance of symbolic
regression models using partial effects. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
750–758.
[6] Guilherme Seidyo Imai Aldeia and Fabricio Olivetti de Franca. 2022. Interpretability in symbolic regression: A benchmark of explanatory methods using the feynman data set. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 23, 3 (2022),
309–349.
[7] Muhammad Sarmad Ali, Meghana Kshirsagar, Enrique Naredo, and Conor Ryan. 2021. Towards automatic grammatical evolution for real-world symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the IJCCI. 68–78.
[8] Dimitrios Angelis, Filippos Sofos, and Theodoros E. Karakasidis. 2023. Artificial intelligence in physical sciences:
Symbolic regression trends and perspectives. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 30, 6 (2023), 3845–
3865.
[9] Aftab Anjum, Fengyang Sun, Lin Wang, and Jeff Orchard. 2019. A novel neural network-based symbolic regression
method: Neuro-encoded expression programming. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Neural
Networks 373–386.
[10] Ignacio Arnaldo, Krzysztof Krawiec, and Una-May O’Reilly. 2014. Multiple regression genetic programming. In Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. 879–886.
[11] Arthur Asuncion and David Newman. 2007. UCI machine learning repository. https://ergodicity.net/2013/07/
[12] Douglas A. Augusto and Helio JC Barbosa. 2013. Accelerated parallel genetic programming tree evaluation with
OpenCL. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 73, 1 (2013), 86–100.
[13] Vernon Austel, Cristina Cornelio, Sanjeeb Dash, Joao Goncalves, Lior Horesh, Tyler Josephson, and Nimrod Megiddo.
2020. Symbolic regression using mixed-integer nonlinear optimization. arXiv:2006.06813. Retrieved from https://
arxiv.org/abs/2006.06813
[14] Vernon Austel, Sanjeeb Dash, Oktay Gunluk, Lior Horesh, Leo Liberti, Giacomo Nannicini, and Baruch Schieber.
2017. Globally optimal symbolic regression. https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10720
[15] Irene Azzali, Leonardo Vanneschi, Sara Silva, Illya Bakurov, and Mario Giacobini. 2019. A vectorial approach to
genetic programming. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Genetic Programming. 213–227.
[16] Deaglan J. Bartlett, Harry Desmond, and Pedro G. Ferreira. 2024. Exhaustive symbolic regression. IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation 28, 4 (2024), 950–964.
[17] Lawrence Beadle and Colin G. Johnson. 2008. Semantically driven crossover in genetic programming. In Proceedings
of the 2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation. 111–116.
[18] Tommaso Bendinelli, Luca Biggio, and Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny. 2023. Controllable neural symbolic regression.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. 2063–2077.
[19] Luca Biggio, Tommaso Bendinelli, Aurelien Lucchi, and Giambattista Parascandolo. 2020. A seq2seq approach to
symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[20] Luca Biggio, Tommaso Bendinelli, Alexander Neitz, Aurelien Lucchi, and Giambattista Parascandolo. 2021. Neural
symbolic regression that scales. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 936–945.
[21] Luca Biggio, Bendinelli Tommaso, and Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny. 2022. Privileged deep symbolic regression. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:27
[22] Kevin René Broløs, Meera Vieira Machado, Chris Cave, Jaan Kasak, Valdemar Stentoft-Hansen, Victor Galindo
Batanero, Tom Jelen, and Casper Wilstrup. 2021. An approach to symbolic regression using feyn. arXiv:2104.05417.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.05417
[23] Karina Brotto Rebuli, Mario Giacobini, Sara Silva, and Leonardo Vanneschi. 2023. A comparison of structural complexity metrics for explainable genetic programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference. 539–542.
[24] Bogdan Burlacu, Gabriel Kronberger, and Michael Kommenda. 2020. Operon C++ an efficient genetic programming
framework for symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1562–
1570.
[25] Bogdan Burlacu, Kaifeng Yang, and Michael Affenzeller. 2024. Population diversity and inheritance in genetic programming for symbolic regression. Natural Computing 23, 3 (2024), 531–566.
[26] Birkan Can and Cathal Heavey. 2011. Comparison of experimental designs for simulation-based symbolic regression
of manufacturing systems. Computers and Industrial Engineering 61, 3 (2011), 447–462.
[27] Lulu Cao, Zimo Zheng, Chenwen Ding, Jinkai Cai, and Min Jiang. 2023. Genetic programming symbolic regression
with simplification-pruning operator for solving differential equations. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 287–298.
[28] Vladimir Ceperic, Niko Bako, and Adrijan Baric. 2014. A symbolic regression-based modelling strategy of AC/DC
rectifiers for RFID applications. Expert Systems with Applications 41, 16 (2014), 7061–7067.
[29] Gang Chen. 2020. Learning symbolic expressions via gumbel-max equation learner networks. arXiv:2012.06921. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.06921
[30] Qi Chen, Bing Xue, Yi Mei, and Mengjie Zhang. 2017. Geometric semantic crossover with an angle-aware mating
scheme in genetic programming for symbolic regression. In Genetic Programming: 20th European Conference, EuroGP
2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, April 19-21, 2017, Proceedings 20. 229–245.
[31] Qi Chen, Bing Xue, Yi Mei, and Mengjie Zhang. 2017. Geometric semantic crossover with an angle-aware mating
scheme in genetic programming for symbolic regression. In Genetic Programming: 20th European Conference, EuroGP
2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, April 19-21, 2017, Proceedings 20. 229–245.
[32] Qi Chen, Bing Xue, Ben Niu, and Mengjie Zhang. 2016. Improving generalisation of genetic programming for highdimensional symbolic regression with feature selection. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference. 3793–3800.
[33] Qi Chen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2018. Improving generalization of genetic programming for symbolic regression with angle-driven geometric semantic operators. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 23, 3 (2018),
488–502.
[34] Qi Chen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2020. Genetic programming for instance transfer learning in symbolic
regression. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 52, 1 (2020), 25–38.
[35] Qi Chen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2020. Preserving population diversity based on transformed semantics in
genetic programming for symbolic regression. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 25, 3 (2020), 433–447.
[36] Qi Chen, Mengjie Zhang, and Bing Xue. 2017. Feature selection to improve generalization of genetic programming
for high-dimensional symbolic regression. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 21, 5 (2017), 792–806.
[37] Yongliang Chen, Jinghui Zhong, and Mingkui Tan. 2018. Comprehensive learning gene expression programming for
automatic implicit equation discovery. In Proceedings of the Computational Science. 114–128.
[38] Zhao Chen, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. 2021. Physics-informed learning of governing equations from scarce data. Nature
Communications 12, 1 (2021), 6136.
[39] Thi Huong Chu, Quang Uy Nguyen, and Van Loi Cao. 2018. Semantics based substituting technique for reducing code
bloat in genetic programming. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Communications and Information
Technologies. 77–83.
[40] Thi Huong Chu, Quang Uy Nguyen, and Michael O’Neill. 2018. Semantic tournament selection for genetic programming based on statistical analysis of error vectors. Information Sciences 436 (2018), 352–366.
[41] J. Manuel Colmenar, Raúl Martín-Santamaría, and J. Ignacio Hidalgo. 2022. WebGE: An open-source tool for symbolic regression using grammatical evolution. In Proceedings of the International Conference on the Applications of
Evolutionary Computation. 269–282.
[42] Allan Costa, Rumen Dangovski, Owen Dugan, Samuel Kim, Pawan Goyal, Marin Soljačić, and Joseph Jacobson.
2020. Fast neural models for symbolic regression at scale. arXiv:2007.10784. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/
2007.10784
[43] Alison Cozad and Nikolaos V. Sahinidis. 2018. A global MINLP approach to symbolic regression. Mathematical Programming 170 (2018), 97–119.
[44] Miles Cranmer. 2023. Interpretable machine learning for science with PySR and SymbolicRegression.jl.
arXiv:2305.01582. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01582
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:28 J. Dong and J. Zhong
[45] Miles Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho.
2020. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive biases. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 17429–17442.
[46] Laure Crochepierre, Lydia Boudjeloud-Assala, and Vincent Barbesant. 2022. Interactive reinforcement learning for
symbolic regression from multi-format human-preference feedbacks. In Proceedings of the Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell
[47] Laure Crochepierre, Lydia Boudjeloud-Assala, and Vincent Barbesant. 2022. A reinforcement learning approach to
domain-knowledge inclusion using grammar guided symbolic regression. arXiv:2202.04367. Retrieved from https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2202.04367
[48] Daniel Cunnington, Flaviu Cipcigan, Rodrigo Neumann Barros Ferreira, and Jonathan Booth. 2023. Symbolic learning
for material discovery. arXiv:2312.11487. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11487
[49] Léo Françoso dal Piccol Sotto and Vinícius Veloso de Melo. 2016. Studying bloat control and maintenance of effective
code in linear genetic programming for symbolic regression. Neurocomputing 180 (2016), 79–93.
[50] Kourosh Danai and William G. La Cava. 2021. Controller design by symbolic regression. Mechanical Systems and
Signal Processing 151 (2021), 107348.
[51] Stéphane d’Ascoli, Sören Becker, Alexander Mathis, Philippe Schwaller, and Niki Kilbertus. 2023. ODEFormer: Symbolic regression of dynamical systems with transformers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.05573
[52] FO de Franca, M. Virgolin, M. Kommenda, MS Majumder, M. Cranmer, G. Espada, L. Ingelse, A. Fonseca, M. Landajuela, B. Petersen, et al. 2024. SRBench++: Principled benchmarking of symbolic regression with domain-expert
interpretation. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2024).
[53] AK Deklel, AM Hamdy, and Elsayed M. Saad. 2018. Multi-objective symbolic regression using long-term artificial
neural network memory (LTANN-MEM) and neural symbolization algorithm (NSA). Neural Computing and Applications 29 (2018), 935–942.
[54] Erik Derner, Jiří Kubalík, Nicola Ancona, and Robert Babuška. 2020. Constructing parsimonious analytic models for
dynamic systems via symbolic regression. Applied Soft Computing 94 (2020), 106432.
[55] Grant Dick, Caitlin A Owen, and Peter A Whigham. 2020. Feature standardisation and coefficient optimisation for
effective symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 306–314.
[56] Li Ding, Ryan Boldi, Thomas Helmuth, and Lee Spector. 2022. Lexicase selection at scale. In Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 2054–2062.
[57] Li Ding, Edward Pantridge, and Lee Spector. 2023. Probabilistic lexicase selection. In Proceedings of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference (2023), 1073–1081.
[58] Daniel M. DiPietro and Bo Zhu. 2022. Symplectically integrated symbolic regression of hamiltonian dynamical systems. arXiv:1409.0473. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.00133
[59] Junlan Dong, Jinghui Zhong, Wei-Neng Chen, and Jun Zhang. 2023. An efficient federated genetic programming
framework for symbolic regression. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 7, 3 (2023),
858–871.
[60] Junlan Dong, Jinghui Zhong, Wei-Li Liu, and Jun Zhang. 2024. Evolving equation learner for symbolic regression.
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2024).
[61] Ivan Drokin. 2024. Kolmogorov-arnold convolutions: Design principles and empirical studies. arXiv:2407.01092. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01092
[62] Stéphane d’Ascoli, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Guillaume Lample, and Francois Charton. 2022. Deep symbolic regression for recurrence prediction. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. 4520–4536.
[63] Achiya Elyasaf and Moshe Sipper. 2014. Software review: The heuristiclab framework. Genet. Program. Evolvable
Mach. 15 (2014), 215–218.
[64] Marissa R. Engle and Nikolaos V. Sahinidis. 2022. Deterministic symbolic regression with derivative information:
General methodology and application to equations of state. AIChE Journal 68, 6 (2022), e17457.
[65] Jacques A. Esterhuizen, Bryan R. Goldsmith, and Suljo Linic. 2022. Interpretable machine learning for knowledge
generation in heterogeneous catalysis. Nature Catalysis 5, 3 (2022), 175–184.
[66] Michael Fenton, James McDermott, David Fagan, Stefan Forstenlechner, Erik Hemberg, and Michael O’Neill. 2017.
Ponyge2: Grammatical evolution in python. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
1194–1201.
[67] Francisco Fernández, Marco Tomassini, William F. Punch, and JM Sanchez. 2000. Experimental study of multipopulation parallel genetic programming. In Proceedings of the Eur. Conf. Genetic Program. 283–293.
[68] Félix-Antoine Fortin, François-Michel De Rainville, Marc-André Gardner Gardner, Marc Parizeau, and Christian
Gagné. 2012. DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made easy. Journal of Machine Learning Research 13, 1 (2012),
2171–2175.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:29
[69] Lei Gan, Hao Wu, and Zheng Zhong. 2022. Integration of symbolic regression and domain knowledge for interpretable modeling of remaining fatigue life under multistep loading. International Journal of Fatigue 161 (2022),
106889.
[70] Nikola Gligorovski and Jinghui Zhong. 2023. LGP-VEC: A vectorial linear genetic programming for symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 579–582.
[71] Riccardo Guidotti. 2021. Evaluating local explanation methods on ground truth. Artificial Intelligence 291 (2021),
103428.
[72] Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi. 2018. A
survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM Computing Surveys 51, 5 (2018), 1–42.
[73] Jiaming Guo, Rui Zhang, Shaohui Peng, Qi Yi, Xing Hu, Ruizhi Chen, Zidong Du, Ling Li, Qi Guo, Yunji Chen, et al.
2024. Efficient symbolic policy learning with differentiable symbolic expression. In Proceedings of the Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[74] C. Haider, FO de Franca, B. Burlacu, and G. Kronberger. 2023. Shape-constrained multi-objective genetic programming for symbolic regression. Applied Soft Computing 132 (2023), 109855.
[75] Samuel Holt, Zhaozhi Qian, and Mihaela van der Schaar. 2022. Deep generative symbolic regression. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations. 1–42. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.00282
[76] Zhixing Huang, Yi Mei, Fangfang Zhang, and Mengjie Zhang. 2024. Multitask linear genetic programming with
shared individuals and its application to dynamic job shop scheduling. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 28, 6 (2024), 1546–1560.
[77] Zhixing Huang, Yi Mei, and Jinghui Zhong. 2022. Semantic linear genetic programming for symbolic regression. IEEE
Trans. Cybern. 54, 2 (2022), 1321–1334.
[78] Zhixing Huang, Jinghui Zhong, Liang Feng, Yi Mei, and Wentong Cai. 2020. A fast parallel genetic programming
framework with adaptively weighted primitives for symbolic regression. Soft Comput. 24 (2020), 7523–7539.
[79] Noman Javed, Fernand Gobet, and Peter Lane. 2022. Simplification of genetic programs: A literature survey. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery 36, 4 (2022), 1279–1300.
[80] Hoseong Jeong, Jae Hyun Kim, Seung-Ho Choi, Seokin Lee, Inwook Heo, and Kang Su Kim. 2022. Semantic cluster
operator for symbolic regression and its applications. Advances in Engineering Software 172 (2022), 103174.
[81] Ying Jin, Weilin Fu, Jian Kang, Jiadong Guo, and Jian Guo. 2019. Bayesian symbolic regression. arXiv:1910.08892.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.08892
[82] Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Guillaume Lample, and François Charton. 2022. End-to-end symbolic
regression with transformers. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022),
10269–10281.
[83] Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Guillaume Lample, Sylvain Lamprier, and Marco Virgolin. 2023. Deep generative symbolic regression with monte-carlo-tree-search. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning.
15655–15668.
[84] Lukas Kammerer, Gabriel Kronberger, Bogdan Burlacu, Stephan M. Winkler, Michael Kommenda, and Michael Affenzeller. 2020. Symbolic regression by exhaustive search: Reducing the search space using syntactical constraints
and efficient semantic structure deduplication. Genetic Programming Theory and Practice XVII (2020), 79–99.
[85] Lukas Kammerer, Gabriel Kronberger, and Michael Kommenda. 2022. Symbolic regression with fast function extraction and nonlinear least squares optimization. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Aided
Systems Theory. 139–146.
[86] Mengde Kang, Kai Huang, Jiahui Li, Honglai Liu, and Cheng Lian. 2024. Theoretical design of dendrite-free zinc
anode through intrinsic descriptors from symbolic regression. Journal of Materials Informatics 4, 2 (2024), N–A.
[87] Aleksandar Kartelj and Marko Djukanović. 2023. RILS-ROLS: Robust symbolic regression via iterated local search
and ordinary least squares. Journal of Big Data 10, 71 (2023), 1–28.
[88] Ahmed Kattan and Yew-Soon Ong. 2015. Surrogate genetic programming: A semantic aware evolutionary search.
Information Sciences 296 (2015), 345–359.
[89] Maarten Keijzer. 2003. Improving symbolic regression with interval arithmetic and linear scaling. In Proceedings of
the European Conference on Genetic Programming. 70–82.
[90] Maarten Keijzer and Vladan Babovic. 1999. Dimensionally aware genetic programming. In Proceedings of the 1st
Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. 1069–1076.
[91] Johannes Kepler. 1953. Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae. Jo. Plancus.
[92] Liron Simon Keren, Alex Liberzon, and Teddy Lazebnik. 2023. A computational framework for physics-informed
symbolic regression with straightforward integration of domain knowledge. Scientific Reports 13, 1 (2023), 1249.
[93] Jongeun Kim, Sven Leyffer, and Prasanna Balaprakash. 2023. Learning symbolic expressions: Mixed-integer
formulations, cuts, and heuristics. Informs Journal on Computing 35, 6 (2023), 1383–1403.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:30 J. Dong and J. Zhong
[94] Joanne T Kim, Sookyung Kim, and Brenden K. Petersen. 2021. An interactive visualization platform for deep symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on International Joint Conferences on Artificial
Intelligence. 5261–5263.
[95] Samuel Kim, Peter Y. Lu, Srijon Mukherjee, Michael Gilbert, Li Jing, Vladimir Čeperić, and Marin Soljačić. 2020.
Integration of neural network-based symbolic regression in deep learning for scientific discovery. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 32, 9 (2020), 4166–4177.
[96] Kenneth E. Kinnear and Peter J. Angeline. 1994. Advances in Genetic Programming.
[97] Jon Klein and Lee Spector. 2007. Unwitting distributed genetic programming via asynchronous JavaScript and XML.
In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1628–1635.
[98] Michael Kommenda, Gabriel Kronberger, Michael Affenzeller, Stephan M. Winkler, and Bogdan Burlacu. 2016. Evolving simple symbolic regression models by multi-objective genetic programming. Genetic Programming Theory and
Practice XIII (2016), 1–19.
[99] Michael F. Korns. 2011. Accuracy in symbolic regression. Genetic Programming Theory and Practice IX (2011),
129–151.
[100] Mark E. Kotanchek, Ekaterina Vladislavleva, and Guido Smits. 2013. Symbolic regression is not enough: It takes a
village to raise a model. Genetic Programming Theory and Practice X (2013), 187–203.
[101] John R. Koza. 1994. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Statistics and
Computing 4 (1994), 87–112.
[102] John R. Koza. 1994. Genetic Programming II: Automatic Discovery of Reusable Programs. MIT Press.
[103] John R. Koza et al. 1989. Hierarchical genetic algorithms operating on populations of computer programs. In Proceedings of the Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. 768–774.
[104] Krzysztof Krawiec. 2012. Medial crossovers for genetic programming. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Genetic Programming. 61–72.
[105] Krzysztof Krawiec and Tomasz Pawlak. 2013. Approximating geometric crossover by semantic backpropagation. In
Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 941–948.
[106] Gabriel Kronberger. 2011. Symbolic regression for knowledge discovery: Bloat, overfitting, and variable interaction
networks. ACM SIGEVOlution 5, 4 (2011), 25–25.
[107] Gabriel Kronberger, J. Manuel Colmenar, Stephan M. Winkler, and J. Ignacio Hidalgo. 2020. Multilayer analysis of
population diversity in grammatical evolution for symbolic regression. Soft Comput. 24 (2020), 11283–11295.
[108] Gabriel Kronberger, Fabricio Olivetti de França, Bogdan Burlacu, Christian Haider, and Michael Kommenda. 2022.
Shape-constrained symbolic regression—improving extrapolation with prior knowledge. Evolutionary Computation
30, 1 (2022), 75–98.
[109] Gabriel Kronberger, Lukas Kammerer, Bogdan Burlacu, Stephan M. Winkler, Michael Kommenda, and Michael Affenzeller. 2019. Cluster analysis of a symbolic regression search space. Genetic Programming Theory and Practice XVI
(2019), 85–102.
[110] Gabriel Kronberger, Michael Kommenda, Andreas Promberger, and Falk Nickel. 2018. Predicting friction system
performance with symbolic regression and genetic programming with factor variables. In Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1278–1285.
[111] Gabriel Kronberger, Stefan Wagner, Michael Kommenda, Andreas Beham, Andreas Scheibenpflug, and Michael Affenzeller. 2012. Knowledge discovery through symbolic regression with heuristiclab. In Proceedings of the Machine
Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference. 824–827.
[112] Jiří Kubalík, Erik Derner, and Robert Babuška. 2020. Symbolic regression driven by training data and prior knowledge.
In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 958–966.
[113] Jiří Kubalík, Erik Derner, and Robert Babuška. 2021. Multi-objective symbolic regression for physics-aware dynamic
modeling. Expert Systems with Applications 182 (2021), 115210.
[114] Jiří Kubalík, Erik Derner, and Robert Babuška. 2023. Neural networks for symbolic regression. arXiv:2302.00773.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00773
[115] Jun-Ichi Kushida, Akira Hara, and Tetsuyuki Takahama. 2018. Cartesian genetic programming with module mutation
for symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics.
159–164.
[116] Matt J. Kusner, Brooks Paige, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. 2017. Grammar variational autoencoder. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. 1945–1954.
[117] William La Cava, Bogdan Burlacu, Marco Virgolin, Michael Kommenda, Patryk Orzechowski, Fabrício Olivetti de
França, Ying Jin, and Jason H. Moore. 2021. Contemporary symbolic regression methods and their relative performance. Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. 2021, DB1 (2021), 1–16.
[118] William La Cava, Tilak Raj Singh, James Taggart, Srinivas Suri, and Jason H. Moore. 2019. Learning concise representations for regression by evolving networks of trees. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (2019).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:31
[119] William La Cava, Lee Spector, and Kourosh Danai. 2016. Epsilon-lexicase selection for regression. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 741–748.
[120] William G. La Cava, Paul C. Lee, Imran Ajmal, Xiruo Ding, Priyanka Solanki, Jordana B. Cohen, Jason H. Moore,
and Daniel S. Herman. 2023. A flexible symbolic regression method for constructing interpretable clinical prediction
models. NPJ Digital Medicine 6, 1 (2023), 107.
[121] Guillaume Lample and François Charton. 2019. Deep learning for symbolic mathematics. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations.
[122] Mikel Landajuela, Chak Shing Lee, Jiachen Yang, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P. Santiago, Ignacio Aravena, Terrell Mundhenk, Garrett Mulcahy, and Brenden K. Petersen. 2022. A unified framework for deep symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 33985–33998.
[123] Nam Le, Hoai Nguyen Xuan, Anthony Brabazon, and Thuong Pham Thi. 2016. Complexity measures in genetic programming learning: A brief review. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Evolutionary Computation.
2409–2416.
[124] Claire Le Goues, ThanhVu Nguyen, Stephanie Forrest, and Westley Weimer. 2011. Genprog: A generic method for
automatic software repair. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 38, 1 (2011), 54–72.
[125] Alessandro Leite and Marc Schoenauer. 2023. Memetic semantic genetic programming for symbolic regression. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Genetic Programming. 198–212.
[126] Andrew Lensen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2020. Genetic programming for evolving a front of interpretable
models for data visualization. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 51, 11 (2020), 5468–5482.
[127] Dongrui Li and Jinghui Zhong. 2020. Dimensionally aware multi-objective genetic programming for automatic crowd
behavior modeling. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation 30, 3 (2020), 1–24.
[128] Jiachen Li, Ye Yuan, and Hong-Bin Shen. 2022. Symbolic expression transformer: A computer vision approach for
symbolic regression. arXiv:2205.11798. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11798
[129] Li Li, Minjie Fan, Rishabh Singh, and Patrick Riley. 2019. Neural-guided symbolic regression with asymptotic constraints. arXiv:1901.07714. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.07714
[130] Wenqiang Li, Weijun Li, Linjun Sun, Min Wu, Lina Yu, Jingyi Liu, Yanjie Li, and Songsong Tian. 2022. Transformerbased model for symbolic regression via joint supervised learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations.
[131] S-C Lin, Georg Martius, and Martin Oettel. 2020. Analytical classical density functionals from an equation learning
network. The Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 2 (2020), 1–7.
[132] Ziming Liu, Yixuan Wang, Sachin Vaidya, Fabian Ruehle, James Halverson, Marin Soljačić, Thomas Y. Hou, and
Max Tegmark. 2024. Kan: Kolmogorov-arnold networks. arXiv:2404.19756. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.
19756
[133] Qiang Lu, Jun Ren, and Zhiguang Wang. 2016. Using genetic programming with prior formula knowledge to solve
symbolic regression problem. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2016 (2016), 1–1.
[134] José María Luna, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Maria Jose Del Jesus, and Sebastián Ventura. 2017. Mining context-aware
association rules using grammar-based genetic programming. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 48, 11 (2017),
3030–3044.
[135] Yuanzhen Luo, Qiang Lu, Xilei Hu, Jake Luo, and Zhiguang Wang. 2022. Exploring hidden semantics in neural networks with symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 982–990.
[136] Nour Makke and Sanjay Chawla. 2024. Interpretable scientific discovery with symbolic regression: A review. Artif.
Intell. Review 57, 1 (2024), 2.
[137] Yazmin Maldonado, Ruben Salas, Joel A. Quevedo, Rogelio Valdez, and Leonardo Trujillo. 2024. GSGP-hardware: Instantaneous symbolic regression with an FPGA implementation of geometric semantic genetic programming. Genet.
Program. Evolvable Mach. 25, 2 (2024), 18.
[138] Abdul Manazir and Khalid Raza. 2019. Recent developments in cartesian genetic programming and its variants. ACM
Computing Surveys 51, 6 (2019), 1–29.
[139] Joao Francisco BS Martins, Luiz Otavio VB Oliveira, Luis F. Miranda, Felipe Casadei, and Gisele L. Pappa. 2018. Solving
the exponential growth of symbolic regression trees in geometric semantic genetic programming. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1151–1158.
[140] Georg Martius and Christoph H. Lampert. 2016. Extrapolation and learning equations. arXiv:1610.02995. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02995
[141] Konstantin T. Matchev, Katia Matcheva, and Alexander Roman. 2022. Analytical modeling of exoplanet transit spectroscopy with dimensional analysis and symbolic regression. The Astrophysical Journal 930, 1 (2022), 33.
[142] Yoshitomo Matsubara, Naoya Chiba, Ryo Igarashi, and Yoshitaka Ushiku. 2022. SRSD: Rethinking datasets of symbolic regression for scientific discovery. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:32 J. Dong and J. Zhong
[143] Trent McConaghy. 2011. FFX: Fast, scalable, deterministic symbolic regression technology. Genetic Programming
Theory and Practice IX (2011), 235–260.
[144] James McDermott, David R. White, Sean Luke, Luca Manzoni, Mauro Castelli, Leonardo Vanneschi, Wojciech
Jaskowski, Krzysztof Krawiec, Robin Harper, Kenneth De Jong, et al. 2012. Genetic programming needs better benchmarks. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 791–798.
[145] Jorge Medina and Andrew D. White. 2023. Active learning in symbolic regression performance with physical constraints. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.10379
[146] Eric Medvet, Marco Virgolin, Mauro Castelli, Peter AN Bosman, Ivo Gonçalves, and Tea Tušar. 2018. Unveiling evolutionary algorithm representation with DU maps. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 19 (2018), 351–389.
[147] Yi Mei, Qi Chen, Andrew Lensen, Bing Xue, and Mengjie Zhang. 2022. Explainable artificial intelligence by genetic
programming: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 27, 3 (2022), 621–641.
[148] Renato Miranda Filho, Anisio Lacerda, and Gisele L. Pappa. 2020. Explaining symbolic regression predictions. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation . 1–8.
[149] David J. Montana. 1995. Strongly typed genetic programming. Evolutionary Computation 3, 2 (1995), 199–230.
[150] José L. Montaña, César L. Alonso, Cruz E. Borges, and Cristina Tîrnăucă. 2016. Model-driven regularization approach
to straight line program genetic programming. Expert System with Applications 57 (2016), 76–90.
[151] Alberto Moraglio, Krzysztof Krawiec, and Colin G. Johnson. 2012. Geometric semantic genetic programming. In
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature-PPSN XII: 12th International Conference, Taormina, Italy, September 1-5, 2012,
Proceedings, Part I 12. 21–31.
[152] Flávio AA Motta, João M. De Freitas, Felipe R. De Souza, Heder S. Bernardino, Itamar L. De Oliveira, and Helio JC
Barbosa. 2018. A hybrid grammar-based genetic programming for symbolic regression problems. In Proceedings of
the 2018 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation. 1–8.
[153] T. Nathan Mundhenk, Mikel Landajuela, Ruben Glatt, Claudio P. Santiago, Daniel M. Faissol, and Brenden K. Petersen.
2021. Symbolic regression via neural-guided genetic programming population seeding. arXiv:2111.00053. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.00053
[154] Luis Muñoz, Leonardo Trujillo, and Sara Silva. 2020. Transfer learning in constructive induction with genetic programming. Genet. Program. Evolvable Mach. 21, 4 (2020), 529–569.
[155] Giorgia Nadizar, Luigi Rovito, Andrea De Lorenzo, Eric Medvet, and Marco Virgolin. 2024. An analysis of the ingredients for learning interpretable symbolic regression models with human-in-the-loop and genetic programming.
ACM Transactions on Evolutionary Learning and Optimization 4, 1 (2024), 1–30.
[156] MZ Naser and Ahmed Z. Naser. 2024. SPINEX_ symbolic regression: Similarity-based symbolic regression with explainable neighbors exploration. arXiv:2411.03358. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03358
[157] Pascal Neumann, Liwei Cao, Danilo Russo, Vassilios S. Vassiliadis, and Alexei A. Lapkin. 2020. A new formulation
for symbolic regression to identify physico-chemical laws from experimental data. Chemical Engineering Journal 387
(2020), 123412.
[158] Isaac Newton. 1934. 1729. The mathematical principles of natural philosophy. By Sir Isaac Newton. Translated into
English by Andrew Motte. To which are added, The laws of the moon’s motion, according to gravity. By John Machin
Astron. Prof. Gresh. and Secr. R. Soc. In two volumes (Benjamin Motte, at the Middle-Temple-Gate, in Fleetstreet) 50
(1934).
[159] Quang Uy Nguyen, Xuan Hoai Nguyen, and Michael O’Neill. 2009. Semantic aware crossover for genetic programming: The case for real-valued function regression. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Genetic Programming.
292–302.
[160] Su Nguyen, Mengjei Zhang, Damminda Alahakoon, and Kay Chen Tan. 2018. Visualizing the evolution of computer
programs for genetic programming [research frontier]. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine 13, 4 (2018), 77–94.
[161] Ji Ni and Peter Rockett. 2014. Tikhonov regularization as a complexity measure in multiobjective genetic programming. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 19, 2 (2014), 157–166.
[162] Luiz Otavio VB Oliveira, Fernando EB Otero, and Gisele L. Pappa. 2016. A dispersion operator for geometric semantic
genetic programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 773–780.
[163] Randal S. Olson, William La Cava, Patryk Orzechowski, Ryan J. Urbanowicz, and Jason H. Moore. 2017. PMLB: A
large benchmark suite for machine learning evaluation and comparison. BioData Mining 10 (2017), 36.
[164] Michael O’Neill and Conor Ryan. 2001. Grammatical evolution. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 5, 4
(2001), 349–358.
[165] Michael O’Neill. 2009. Riccardo Poli, William B. Langdon, Nicholas F. McPhee: A Field Guide to Genetic Programming:
Lulu. com, 2008, 250 pp, ISBN 978-1-4092-0073-4.
[166] Yangchen Pan, Ehsan Imani, Amir-massoud Farahmand, and Martha White. 2020. An implicit function learning
approach for parametric modal regression. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33 (2020), 11442–11452.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:33
[167] Daniele M. Papetti, Andrea Tangherloni, Davide Farinati, Paolo Cazzaniga, and Leonardo Vanneschi. 2023. Simplifying fitness landscapes using dilation functions evolved with genetic programming. IEEE Computational Intelligence
Magazine 18, 1 (2023), 22–31.
[168] Tomasz P. Pawlak. 2016. Geometric semantic genetic programming is overkill. In Genetic Programming: 19th European
Conference, EuroGP 2016, Porto, Portugal, March 30-April 1, 2016, Proceedings 19. 246–260.
[169] Christian S. Perone. 2009. Pyevolve: A python open-source framework for genetic algorithms. ACM Sigevolution 4, 1
(2009), 12–20.
[170] Brenden K. Petersen, Mikel Landajuela, T. Nathan Mundhenk, Claudio P. Santiago, Soo K. Kim, and Joanne T. Kim.
2020. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients.
(2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04871
[171] Dao Ngoc Phong, Nguyen Quang Uy, Nguyen Xuan Hoai, and Robert I. McKay. 2012. Evolving approximations for
the gaussian q-function by genetic programming with semantic based crossover. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress
on Evolutionary Computation. 1–6.
[172] Riccardo Poli, William B. Langdon, Nicholas F. McPhee, and John R. Koza. 2008. A field guide to genetic programming.
(2008). https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/S10710-008-9073-Y
[173] Markus Quade, Julien Gout, and Markus Abel. 2018. Glyph: Symbolic regression tools. arXiv:1803.06226. Retrieved
from https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.06226
[174] Atif Rafiq, Enrique Naredo, Meghana Kshirsagar, and Conor Ryan. 2022. On the effect of embedding hierarchy within
multi-objective optimization for evolving symbolic regression models. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. 594–597.
[175] David L. Randall, Tyler S. Townsend, Jacob D. Hochhalter, and Geoffrey F. Bomarito. 2022. Bingo: A customizable
framework for symbolic regression with genetic programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 2282–2288.
[176] Shahab Razavi and Eric R. Gamazon. 2022. Neural-network-directed genetic programmer for discovery of governing
equations. arXiv:2203.08808. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.08808
[177] Patrick AK Reinbold, Logan M. Kageorge, Michael F. Schatz, and Roman O. Grigoriev. 2021. Robust learning from
noisy, incomplete, high-dimensional experimental data via physically constrained symbolic regression. Nature Communications 12, 1 (2021), 3219.
[178] Maximilian Reissmann, Yuan Fang, Andrew Ooi, and Richard Sandberg. 2024. Constraining genetic symbolic regression via semantic backpropagation. arXiv:2409.07369. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07369
[179] Subham Sahoo, Christoph Lampert, and Georg Martius. 2018. Learning equations for extrapolation and control. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. 4442–4450.
[180] Aliyu Sani Sambo, R. Muhammad Atif Azad, Yevgeniya Kovalchuk, Vivek Padmanaabhan Indramohan, and Hanifa
Shah. 2021. Evolving simple and accurate symbolic regression models via asynchronous parallel computing. Appl.
Soft Comput. 104 (2021), 107198.
[181] Jeffrey R. Sampson. 1976. Adaptation in natural and artificial systems (John H. Holland). https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/
10.1137/1018105
[182] Andrija T. Sarić, Aleksandar A. Sarić, Mark K. Transtrum, and Aleksandar M. Stanković. 2020. Symbolic regression
for data-driven dynamic model refinement in power systems. IEEE Trans. Power Systems 36, 3 (2020), 2390–2402.
[183] Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. 2009. Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data. Science 324, 5923
(2009), 81–85.
[184] Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. 2009. Symbolic regression of implicit equations. In Proceedings of the Genetic
Programming Theory and Practice VII. 73–85.
[185] Eric O. Scott and Sean Luke. 2019. ECJ at 20: Toward a general metaheuristics toolkit. In Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1391–1398.
[186] Dominic P. Searson, David E. Leahy, and Mark J. Willis. 2010. GPTIPS: An open source genetic programming toolbox
for multigene symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Int. Multiconference of Engineers and Computer Scientists
Citeseer. 77–80.
[187] Parshin Shojaee, Kazem Meidani, Amir Barati Farimani, and Chandan Reddy. 2024. Transformer-based planning for
symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[188] Jinglu Song, Qiang Lu, Bozhou Tian, Jingwen Zhang, Jake Luo, and Zhiguang Wang. 2024. Prove symbolic regression
is NP-hard by symbol graph. arXiv:2404.13820. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13820
[189] Trevor Stephens. 2019. GPLearn (2015). Retrieved from https://gplearn.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html. (2019).
[190] Steven H. Strogatz. 2018. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos with Student Solutions Manual: With Applications to Physics,
Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429399640
[191] Sheng Sun, Runhai Ouyang, Bochao Zhang, and Tong-Yi Zhang. 2019. Data-driven discovery of formulas by symbolic
regression. MRS Bulletin 44, 7 (2019), 559–564.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:34 J. Dong and J. Zhong
[192] Wassim Tenachi, Rodrigo Ibata, and Foivos I. Diakogiannis. 2023. Deep symbolic regression for physics guided by
units constraints: Toward the automated discovery of physical laws. The Astrophysical Journal 959, 2 (2023), 99.
[193] Mattias E. Thing and Sofie M. Koksbang. 2024. cp3-bench: A tool for benchmarking symbolic regression algorithms
tested with cosmology. arXiv:2406.15531. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15531
[194] Yuan Tian, Wenqi Zhou, Hao Dong, David S. Kammer, and Olga Fink. 2024. Sym-Q: Adaptive symbolic regression
via sequential decision-making. arXiv:2402.05306. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05306
[195] Ho Fung Tsoi, Vladimir Loncar, Sridhara Dasu, and Philip Harris. 2024. SymbolNet: Neural symbolic regression with
adaptive dynamic pruning. arXiv:2401.09949. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.09949
[196] Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. 2020. AI feynman: A physics-inspired method for symbolic regression.
Science Advances 6, 16 (2020), eaay2631.
[197] Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. 2021. Symbolic pregression: Discovering physical laws from distorted
video. Physical Review E 103, 4 (2021), 043307.
[198] Nguyen Quang Uy, Nguyen Xuan Hoai, Michael O’Neill, Robert I. McKay, and Edgar Galván-López. 2011.
Semantically-based crossover in genetic programming: Application to real-valued symbolic regression. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 12 (2011), 91–119.
[199] Nguyen Quang Uy, Nguyen Xuan Hoai, Michael O’Neill, Robert I. McKay, and Dao Ngoc Phong. 2013. On the roles
of semantic locality of crossover in genetic programming. Information Sciences 235 (2013), 195–213.
[200] Harsha Vaddireddy and Omer San. 2019. Equation discovery using fast function extraction: A deterministic symbolic
regression approach. Fluids 4, 2 (2019), 111.
[201] Mojtaba Valipour, Bowen You, Maysum Panju, and Ali Ghodsi. 2021. Symbolicgpt: A generative transformer model
for symbolic regression. arXiv:2106.14131. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.14131
[202] Jan N. Van Rijn, Bernd Bischl, Luis Torgo, Bo Gao, Venkatesh Umaashankar, Simon Fischer, Patrick Winter, Bernd
Wiswedel, Michael R. Berthold, and Joaquin Vanschoren. 2013. OpenML: A collaborative science platform. In Proceedings of the Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Jnowledge Discovery in Databases. 645–649.
[203] Leonardo Vanneschi and Mauro Castelli. 2021. Soft target and functional complexity reduction: A hybrid regularization method for genetic programming. Expert Systems with Applications 177 (2021), 114929.
[204] Leonardo Vanneschi, Mauro Castelli, and Sara Silva. 2014. A survey of semantic methods in genetic programming.
Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 15 (2014), 195–214.
[205] Marco Virgolin, Tanja Alderliesten, and Peter AN Bosman. 2019. Linear scaling with and within semantic
backpropagation-based genetic programming for symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. 1084–1092.
[206] Marco Virgolin, Tanja Alderliesten, Cees Witteveen, and Peter AN Bosman. 2021. Improving model-based genetic
programming for symbolic regression of small expressions. Evolutionary Computation 29, 2 (2021), 211–237.
[207] Marco Virgolin and Peter AN Bosman. 2022. Coefficient mutation in the gene-pool optimal mixing evolutionary algorithm for symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference.
2289–2297.
[208] Marco Virgolin and Solon P. Pissis. 2022. Symbolic regression is np-hard. Transactions on Machine Learning Research
(2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.01018
[209] Ekaterina J. Vladislavleva, Guido F. Smits, and Dick Den Hertog. 2008. Order of nonlinearity as a complexity measure
for models generated by symbolic regression via pareto genetic programming. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation 13, 2 (2008), 333–349.
[210] Yiqun Wang, Nicholas Wagner, and James M. Rondinelli. 2019. Symbolic regression in materials science. MRS Communications 9, 3 (2019), 793–805.
[211] Jiahao Wen, Junlan Dong, and Jinghui Zhong. 2024. Sign change detection based fitness evaluation for automatic
implicit equation discovery. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 980–987.
[212] Matthias Werner, Andrej Junginger, Philipp Hennig, and Georg Martius. 2021. Informed equation learning.
arXiv:2105.06331. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.06331
[213] Sebastian Johann Wetzel. 2024. Closed-form interpretation of neural network classifiers with symbolic regression
gradients. arXiv:2401.04978. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04978
[214] Edward William and James Northern. 2008. Genetic programming lab (GPLab) tool set version 3.0. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Region 5 Conference. 1–6.
[215] Casper Wilstrup and Jaan Kasak. 2021. Symbolic regression outperforms other models for small data sets.
arXiv:2103.15147. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.15147
[216] David Wittenberg, Franz Rothlauf, and Dirk Schweim. 2020. DAE-GP: Denoising autoencoder LSTM networks as
probabilistic models in estimation of distribution genetic programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. 1037–1045.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:35
[217] Tony Worm and Kenneth Chiu. 2013. Prioritized grammar enumeration: Symbolic regression by dynamic programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. 1021–1028.
[218] Min Wu, Weijun Li, Lina Yu, Wenqiang Li, Jingyi Liu, Yanjie Li, and Meilan Hao. 2024. PruneSymNet: A symbolic
neural network and pruning algorithm for symbolic regression. arXiv:2401.15103. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/
abs/2401.15103
[219] Min Wu, Weijun Li, Lina Yu, Linjun Sun, Jingyi Liu, and Wenqiang Li. 2025. Discovering mathematical expressions
through DeepSymNet: A classification-based symbolic regression framework. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems 36, 1 (2025), 1356–1370.
[220] Hengrui Xing, Ansaf Salleb-Aouissi, and Nakul Verma. 2021. Automated symbolic law discovery: A computer vision
approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 660–668.
[221] Kunpeng Xu, Lifei Chen, and Shengrui Wang. 2024. Kolmogorov-arnold networks for time series: Bridging predictive
power and interpretability. arXiv:2406.02496. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02496
[222] Kaifeng Yang and Michael Affenzeller. 2023. Surrogate-assisted multi-objective optimization via genetic programming based symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Evolutionary Multi-criterion Optimization. 176–190.
[223] Mengjiao Yang and Been Kim. 2019. BIM: Towards quantitative evaluation of interpretability methods with ground
truth. arXiv:1907.09701. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.09701
[224] Yifan Yang, Gang Chen, Hui Ma, Sven Hartmann, and Mengjie Zhang. 2024. Dual-tree genetic programming with
adaptive mutation for dynamic workflow scheduling in cloud computing. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2024).
[225] Jan Žegklitz and Petr Pošík. 2021. Benchmarking state-of-the-art symbolic regression algorithms. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 22, 1 (2021), 5–33.
[226] Ruihua Zeng, Zhixing Huang, Yongliang Chen, Jinghui Zhong, and Liang Feng. 2020. Comparison of different computing platforms for implementing parallel genetic programming. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation. 1–8.
[227] Hengzhe Zhang, Qi Chen, Bing Xue, Wolfgang Banzhaf, and Mengjie Zhang. 2023. A double lexicase selection operator for bloat control in evolutionary feature construction for regression. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. 1194–1202.
[228] Hengzhe Zhang and Aimin Zhou. 2021. RL-GEP: Symbolic regression via gene expression programming and reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. 1–8.
[229] Michael Zhang, Samuel Kim, Peter Y. Lu, and Marin Soljačić. 2023. Deep learning and symbolic regression for discovering parametric equations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 35, 11( 2024), 16775–16787.
[230] Rui Zhang, Andrew Lensen, and Yanan Sun. 2022. Speeding up genetic programming based symbolic regression
using GPUs. In Proceedings of the Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 519–533.
[231] Zhixin Zhang and Zhiyong Chen. 2021. Modeling and control of robotic manipulators based on symbolic regression.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 34, 5 (2021), 2440–2450.
[232] Wenqing Zheng, Tianlong Chen, Ting-Kuei Hu, and Zhangyang Wang. 2022. Symbolic learning to optimize: Towards
interpretability and scalability. arXiv:2203.06578. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.06578
[233] Jinghui Zhong, Wentong Cai, Michael Lees, and Linbo Luo. 2017. Automatic model construction for the behavior of
human crowds. Applied Soft Computing 56 (2017), 368–378.
[234] Jinghui Zhong, Junlan Dong, Wei-Li Liu, Liang Feng, and Jun Zhang. 2025. Multiform genetic programming framework for symbolic regression problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 29, 2 (2025), 429–443.
[235] Jinghui Zhong, Liang Feng, and Yew-Soon Ong. 2017. Gene expression programming: A survey. IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine 12, 3 (2017), 54–72.
[236] Jinghui Zhong, Yusen Lin, Chengyu Lu, and Zhixing Huang. 2018. A deep learning assisted gene expression programming framework for symbolic regression problems. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing: 25th
International Conference. 530–541.
[237] Jinghui Zhong, Yew-Soon Ong, and Wentong Cai. 2015. Self-learning gene expression programming. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 20, 1 (2015), 65–80.
[238] Jinghui Zhong, Jiaquan Yang, Yongliang Chen, Wei-Li Liu, and Liang Feng. 2021. Mining implicit equations from data
using gene expression programming. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing 10, 2 (2021), 1058–1074.
[239] Lianjie Zhong, Jinghui Zhong, and Chengyu Lu. 2021. A comparative analysis of dimensionality reduction methods for genetic programming to solve high-dimensional symbolic regression problems. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 476–483.
[240] Hongpeng Zhou and Wei Pan. 2022. Bayesian learning to discover mathematical operations in governing equations
of dynamic systems. arXiv:2206.00669. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.00669
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
290:36 J. Dong and J. Zhong
Appendix
Links
AI Feynman dataset: https://space.mit.edu/home/tegmark/aifeynman.html
SRSD: https://huggingface.co/yoshitomo-matsubara
Storgatz dataset: https://williamlacava.com/ode-strogatz/
PMLB: https://github.com/EpistasisLab/pmlb
UCI datasetS: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.php
OpenML datasets: https://github.com/EpistasisLab/pmlb/tree/master/datasets
GE Link: https://www.grammatical-evolution.org
SL-GEP Link: https://jinghuizhong.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/sl-gep-code-dataset.zip
MLSI Link: https://github.com/Zhixing1020/Linear-Genetic-Programming-LGP-andApplications
DLS_GP Link: https://github.com/hengzhe-zhang/DoubleLexicaseSelection
PLS Link: https://github.com/ld-ing/plexicase
MSGP Link: https://gitlab.inria.fr/trust-ai/memetics/msgp
GSGP Link: https://github.com/amoraglio/GSGP
GSGP-Red Link: https://github.com/laic-ufmg/GSGP-Red
SBP-GP Link: https://github.com/marcovirgolin/GP-GOMEA
SLGP Link: https://github.com/Zhixing1020/SemanticLGP_for_SR
GP/TS-S Link: https://github.com/chuthihuong/GP
SciMED Link: https://github.com/LironSimon/SciMED
ELA Link: https://github.com/renatomir/ELA-WCCI2020
DU Map Link: https://machinelearning.inginf.units.it/data-and-tools/unveiling-evolutionaryalgorithm-representation-with-du-maps
DSR link: https://github.com/dso-org/deep-symbolic-optimization
NGPPS link: https://github.com/dso-org/deep-symbolic-optimization
RBG2-SR link: https://github.com/laure-crochepierre/reinforcement-based-grammar-guidedsymbolic-regression
IRL-SR link: https://github.com/laure-crochepierre/interactive-rbg2sr
Phi-SO link: https://github.com/WassimTenachi/PhySO
Sym-Q link: https://github.com/Wenqi-Z/Sym-Q
Sy-Mathematics link: https://github.com/facebookresearch/SymbolicMathematics
SymbolicGPT link: https://github.com/mojivalipour/symbolicgpt
NeSymReS link: https://github.com/SymposiumOrganization/
NeuralSymbolicRegressionThatScales
E2E link: https://github.com/facebookresearch/symbolicregression
JSL-SR link: https://github.com/AILWQ/Joint_Supervised_Learning_for_SR
ODEforme link: https://github.com/sdascoli/odeformer
DGSR link: https://github.com/samholt/DeepGenerativeSymbolicRegression
TPSR link: https://github.com/deep-symbolic-mathematics/TPSR
EQL link: https://github.com/KristofPusztai/EQL
EQL÷ link: https://github.com/martius-lab/EQL
IEQL link: https://github.com/samuelkim314/DeepSymReg
GMEQL link: https://github.com/aaron-vuw/gmeql
FEQL link: https://github.com/ShangChunLin/FEQL
OccamNet link: https://github.com/druidowm/OccamNet_Public
MathONet link: https://github.com/nips2021anonymous/MathONet
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.
Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression 290:37
Parametric-EQL link: https://github.com/samuelkim314/parametric-eql
DeepSymNet link: https://github.com/wumin86/DeepSymNet
PruneSymNet link: https://github.com/wumin86/PruneSymNet
SymbolNet link: https://github.com/hftsoi/SymbolNet
GrammarVAE link: https://github.com/mkusner/grammarVAE
GNSR link: https://github.com/MilesCranmer/symbolic_deep_learning
AI-Feynman link: https://github.com/SJ001/AI-Feynman
EQDiscovery link: https://github.com/isds-neu/EQDiscovery
NSRwH link: https://github.com/SymposiumOrganization/ControllableNeuralSymbolicRegression
SISR link: https://github.com/dandip/SISR
KAN link: https://github.com/KindXiaoming/pykan
Operon link: https://github.com/heal-research/pyoperon
SBP-GP link: https://github.com/marcovirgolin/GP-GOMEA
uDSR link: https://github.com/dso-org/deep-symbolic-optimization
Bingo link: https://github.com/nasa/bingo
E2ET link: https://github.com/pakamienny/e2e_transformer
RILS-ROLS link: https://github.com/kartelj/rils-rols
MRGP link: https://github.com/flexgp/gp-learners
GP-GOMEA link: https://github.com/marcovirgolin/GP-GOMEA
FEAT link: https://github.com/cavalab/feat
SRBench link: https://github.com/cavalab/srbench
SRBench++ link: https://cavalab.org/srbench/competition-2022/
CP3-bench link: https://github.com/CP3-Origins/cp3-bench
iirsBenchmark link: https://github.com/gAldeia/iirsBenchmark
GPLab link: https://gplab.sourceforge.net/
GenProg link: https://github.com/squaresLab/genprog-code
GPC++ link: http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/W.Langdon/ftp/weinbenner/gp.html
ellenGP link: https://github.com/lacava/ellen
GPTIPS link: https://sites.google.com/site/gptips4matlab/
PonyGE2 link: https://github.com/jmmcd/PonyGE2
WebGE link: https://github.com/GRAFO-URJC/WebGE
Eureqa link: http://nutonian.wikidot.com/
QLattice link: https://github.com/abzu-ai/QLattice-clinical-omics
Glyph link: https://github.com/Ambrosys/glyph
DEAP link: https://github.com/DEAP/deap
GPlearn link: https://github.com/trevorstephens/gplearn
PySR link: https://github.com/MilesCranmer/PySR
HeuristicLab link: https://dev.heuristiclab.com/trac.fcgi/
Data-Modeler link: https://evolved-analytics.com/
ALAMO link: https://minlp.com/alamo-modeling-tool
HyperGP link: https://github.com/MZT-srcount/HyperGP
Received 13 July 2024; revised 15 April 2025; accepted 29 April 2025
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 11, Article 290. Publication date: June 2025.